25M. Prohibition of lay -off. 
25N. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen . 
25-O. Procedure for closing down an undertaking . 
25P. Special provision as to restarting of undertakings closed down before commencement of the 
Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1976 . 
25Q. Penalty for lay -off and re trenchment without previous permission . 

15. Duties of La bour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals . 
16. Form of report or award . 
17. Publication of reports and awards . 
17A. Commencement of the award.  
17B. Payment of  full wages to workman pending proceedings in higher courts.  
18. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding . 

 7A. Tribunals .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any 
matter, whether specified in the Second S chedule or the Third Schedule 1[and for performing such other 
functions as may be as signed to them under this Act].  
2[(1A) The Industrial Tribunal constituted by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall also 
exercise, on and from the commencement  of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, the 

9. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  11 
 (i) such allowances (including dearness allowance) as the workman is for the time being 
entitled to;  
(ii) the value of any house accommodation, or of supply of light, water, medical attendance or 
other amenity or of any service or of any concessio nal supply of  foodgrains or other articles;  
(iii) any travelling concession;  

ACT NO. 14 OF 19471  
[11th March , 1947.]  
An Act to make provision for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes, and for 
certain other purposes.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to make provision for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes, 
and for certain other purposes here inafter appearing;  

6[(aa) “arbitrator ” includes an umpire;]  
8[ 9[(aaa)] “average pay ” means the average of t he wages payable to a workman — 
(i) in the case of monthly paid workman, in the three complete calendar months,  
(ii) in the case of weekly paid workm an, in the four complete weeks,  
(iii) in the case of daily paid workman, in the twelve full working days,  
preceding the date on which the average pay becomes payable if the workman had worked for three 

employment s may be specified in the order or as may be determined in accordance with the 
order, including payment of money by the employer to any person who is or has been a workman;  
(b) for requiring any public utility service not to close or remain closed and to work or 
continue to work on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the order, and  
(c) for any incidental or supplementary matter which appears to it to be necessary or 
expedients for the purpose of the order:  

Explanation .—Every workman whose name is borne on the muster rolls of the industrial 
establishment and who presents himself for work at the establishment at the time appointed for the 
purpose during normal working hours on any day and is not given employment by the employer 
within two hours of his so presenting himself shall be deemed to have  been laid -off for that day 
within the meaning of this clause:  
Provided that if the workman, instead of being given employment at the commencement of any 

Explanation :—For the purposes of this sub -clause, “agricultural operation” does not include any activity carried on in a 
plantation as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951); or  
(2) hospita ls or dispensaries; or  
(3) educational, scientific, research or training institutions; or  
(4) institutions owned or managed by organisations wholly or substantially engaged in any charitable, social or 
philanthropic service; or  

illegal lock -out shall not be deem ed to be illegal.  
25. Prohibition of financial aid to i llegal strikes and lock -outs.—No person shall knowingly 
expend or apply any money in direct furtherance of support of any illegal st rike or lock -out. 
3[CHAPTER VA  
LAY-OFF AND RETRENCHMENT  
25A. Appl ication of sections 25C to 25E .—(1) Sections 25C to 25E inclusive 4[shall not apply to 

11A. Powers of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in case of 
discharge or dismissal of workmen . 
12. Duties of conciliation officers . 
13. Duties of Board . 
14. Duties of Courts . 
15. Duties of La bour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals . 

8. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
9. Subs. by Act 25 of 2021, s. 17, for “or dock” (w.e.f. 30 -6-2021).  10 
 (vi) any industry specified in t he 1[First Schedule] which the appropriate Government may, if 
satisfied that public emergency or public interest so requires, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare to be a public utility service for the purposes of this Act, for such period as may 
be specified in the notification:  

Union (hereinafter in this section referred to as "applicant Union" ) makes an application to the Registrar 
for being registered in place of the Union (hereinafter in this section referred to as "representative Union") 
for a unit of an industry on the ground that it has a larger membership of workmen employed in such unit 
of the industry, the Registrar shall call upon the representative Union by a notice in writing to show cause 
within one month of the receipt of such notice why the applicant Union should not be registered in its 
place. An application made under this sub -section shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.  

enforceable on the expiry of thirty d ays from the date of its publication u nder section 17:  
Provided that — 
(a) if the appropriate Government is of opinion, in any case where the award has been given by a 
Labour Court or Tribunal in relation to an industrial dis pute to which it is a party; or  
(b) if the Central Government is of opinion, in any case where the award has bee n given by a 
National Tribunal,  

4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Ins. by s. 7,  ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 5 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
7. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  24 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  

(c) before the expiry of the date of strike specified in a ny such notice as aforesaid; or  
(d) during the pendency of any conciliation proceedings before a conciliation officer and seven 
days after the conclusion of such proceeding s. 
(2) No employer carrying on any public utility service shall lock -out any of his workmen — 
(a) without giving them notice of lock -out as hereinafter provided, within six weeks be fore 
locking out; or  

upon the reference, if the arbitrators are equally divided in their opinion, and the award of the umpire 
shall prevail and shall be deemed to be the arbitration award  for the purposes of this Act.]  
(2) An arbitration agreement referred to i n sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall be signed 
by the parties thereto in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) A copy of the arbitration agreement shall be forwarded to the appropriate Government and the 
conciliation officer and the appropr iate Government shall, within 3[one month] from the date of the 

department including three years of experience as Conciliation Officer:  
Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner shall 
be appointed unless  he resigns from the service of the Central Government or State Government, as the 
case may be, before being appointed as the presiding officer; or  
(c) he is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade III with three years' experience in the grade. ] 
6*    *    *   *    * 

between employers and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the 
employment or non -employment or the terms of e mployment or with the condi tions of labour, of any 
person;  
2[(ka) “industrial establishment or undertaking ” means an establishment or undertaking in wh ich 
any industry is carried on:  
Provided that where several activities are carried on in an establishment  or undertaking and only 

opinion, whether on an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, that the dispute is of such a 
nature that any other establishment, group or clas s of establishments of a similar nature is likely to be 
interested in, or affected by, such dispute, the appropriate Government may, at the time of making the 
reference or at any time thereafter but before the submission of the award, include in that refer ence such 
establishment, group or class of establishments, whether or not at the time of such inclusion any dispute 
exists or is apprehended in that establishment, gro up or class of establishments.]  

Provided that where several activities are carried on in an establishment  or undertaking and only 
one or some of such activities is or are an industry or in dustries, then, — 
(a) if any unit of such establishment or undertaking carrying on any activity, being an 
industry, is severable from the other unit or units of such establishment or undertaking, such unit 
shall be deemed to be a separate industrial establ ishment or undertaking;  
(b) if the predominant activity or each of the predominant activities carried on in such 

Amendment of section 7A .—In clause ( aa) of sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 1947), as inserted by the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka 
Amendment) Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act 6 of 1963), after the words “distr ict Judge” the words “for a 
period of not less than three years”, shall be inserted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 35 of 1963, s. 2]  
Kerala  

(3) The notice of lock -out or strike under this section shall not be necessary where there is already in 
existence a strike or, as the case may be, lock -out in the public utility service, but the employer shall send 
intimation of such lock -out or strike on the day on which it is de clared, to such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government either generally or for a particular area or for a particular cl ass 
of public utility services.  
(4) The notice of strike referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be given by such numbe r of persons to such 

Provided that if the workman, instead of being given employment at the commencement of any 
shift for any day is asked to present himself for the purpose during the second half of the shift for the 
day and is given employment then, he sha ll be deemed to have been laid -off only for one -half of that 
day: 
Provided further that if he is not given any such employment even after so presenting himself, he 
shall not be deemed to have been laid -off for th e second half of the shift for the day and shall be 

Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), after clause ( a), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely: - 
“(aa) he has been a member of the Orissa Superior Judicia l Service for a period of not less than seven 
years.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 1960, s. 2]  
7B. National Tribunals .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more National Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes which, in 

Provided further that it shall be lawful for the employer in any case falling within the foregoing 
proviso to retrench t he workman in accordance with the provisions contained in section 25F at any time 
after the expiry of the first forty -five days of the lay -off and when he does so, any compensation paid to 
the workman for having been laid -off during the preceding twelve mo nths may be set off against the 
compens ation payable for retrenchment.  
Explanation .—”Badli  workman ” means a workman who is employed in an industrial establishment in 

Tribunal considers it necessary or expedient to extend such period, he may for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, extend such period by such furt her period as he may think fit:  
Provided also that in computing an y period specified i n this sub -section, the period, if any, for which 
the proceedings before the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal had been stayed by any injunction 
or order of a  Civil Court shall be excluded:  
                                                           

place. An application made under this sub -section shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Registrar shall forward to the Labour Commissioner of the State Government a copy of the 
said application and notice.  
(3) If, on the expiry of the period of notice under sub -section (1) and after holding such inquiry as he 
deems fit, the Registrar comes to the conclusion that the applicant Union complies with the conditions 
necessary for registration specified in section 9D and that its membership was during the whole of the 

shareholder of an incorporated company which is connected with, or likely to be affected by, such 
industrial dispute; but in such a case, he shall disclose to the appropriate Gover nment the nature and 
extent of the share s held by him in such company;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1964, s. 38 and the Second Schedule, Part II (w.e.f. 1 -7-1964).  
2. The words “the Industrial Development Bank of India” omitted by Act 53 of 2003, s. 12 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 2 -7-2004).  

appropriate Government sha ll appoint such persons as it thin ks fit to represent that party.  
(4) A Board, having the prescribed quorum, may act notwithstanding the absence of the chairman or any of its 
member s or any vacancy in its number:  
Provided that if the appropriate Government  notifies the Board that the services of the chairman or of any other 
member have ceased to be available, the Board shall not act until a new chairman or member, as the c ase may be, 
has been appointed.  

Provided that the appropriate Government may reduce the said period and fi x such period as it thinks 
fit: 
Provided further that the appropriate Government may, before  the expiry of the said period, extend 
the period of operation by any period not exceeding one year at a time as it thinks fit so, however, that the 
total period of operation of any award does not exceed three years from the date o n which it came into 
operation.  

National Housing Bank established under sec tion 3 of the National Housing B ank Act, 1987 (53 
of 1987) ], or 3[4[an air transport service, or a banking or an insurance company ], a mine, an oil -
field] 5[, a Cantonment Board,] or a 6[major po rt, any  company in which not less than fifty -one 
per cent. of the paid -up share capital is held by the Central Government, or any corporation, not 
being a corporation referred to in this clause, established by or under any law made by 
Parliament, or the Central public sector undertaking, subsidiary companies set u p by the principal 

CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Offence by companies, etc.  
33. Conditions of service, etc., to remain unchanged under certain circumstances during pendency of 
proceedings.  
33A. Special provision for adjudication as to whether conditions of service, etc., changed during 

9. Finality of or ders constituting Boards, etc .—(1) No order of the appropriate Government or of 
the Central Government appointing any person as the chairman or any other member of a Board or Court 
or as the presiding officer of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be called in question in 
any manner; and no act or proceeding before any Board or Court shall be called in question in any manner 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982 , s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  

1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982 , s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 158 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 8, for “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), be governed by the provis ions 
of section 184 of that Act” (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 5, for sections 8 and 9 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  20 
 on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the consti tution of, such Board or 

controlled by the State Government, the State Government: Provided that in case of a dispute 
between a contractor and the contract labour employed through the contractor in any industrial 
establis hment where such dispute first arose, the appropriate Government shall be the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, which has control over such industrial 
establishment ;] 
6[(aa) “arbitrator ” includes an umpire;]  

than fourteen days before the expiry of the period of notice under sub -section (1).  
9H. Application for re -registration .-(1) Any Union the registration of which  has been cancelled on 
the ground that it was registered under a mistake or on the ground specified in sub -clause (ii) of clause (a) 
of section 9F may, at any time after three months from the date of such cancellation and on payment of 
such fees as may be prescribed, apply for re -registration. The provisions of sections 9D and 9E shall 
apply in respect of such application.  

4. Conciliation officers . 
5. Board of Conciliation . 
6. Courts of Inquiry . 
7. Labour Courts . 
7A. Tribunals . 
7B. National Tribunals . 

next preceding the date of its so applying under this section a m embership of not less than fifteen per cent. 
of the total number of workmen employed in unit of an industry may apply in the prescribed form to the 
Registrar for registration as a Representative Union.  
9E. Registration of Union .-On receipt of an application from a Union for registration under section 
9D and on payment of the fee prescribed, the Registrar shall, if, after holding such inquiry as he deems fit, 
he comes to the conclusion that the conditions requisite for registrati on specified in the said section are 

employment as may be specified in t he order or as may be determined in accordance with the order, 
including payment of money by the employer to any person who is or has been a workman;  
(b) for requiring any public utility service not to close or remain closed and to work or continue to 
work  on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the order; and  
(c) for any incidental or supplementary matters which appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
the purposes of the order:  

cause for no t raising the dispute within the period of three years.”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 3]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 2, Central Act XIV of 1947 .-In section 2 of the principal Act ;-- 
(i) after clause (aa) the following new clauses shall be inserted, namely - 
" (aaa) "arbitration proceeding" means - 

  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 3.  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7, for “a Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “the Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  

or for the benefit of the workman under any l aw for the time being in force;  
(c) any gratuity payable on t he termination of his service;]  
2[(s) “workman ” means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any 
manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward, 
whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding 
under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, 

he comes to the conclusion that the conditions requisite for registrati on specified in the said section are 
satisfied and that the Union is not otherwise disqualified for registration, enter the name of the Union in 
the appropriate register maintained under section 9C and issue a certificate of registration in such form as 
may be prescribed:  
Provided that - 
(i) where two or more Unions fulfilling the conditions necessary for registration under this 

or a Tribunal shall have the power of a civil court to execut e its o wn award as a decree of a civil court 
and also to execute any settlement as defined in clause (p) of section 2 as a decree.”  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 45 of 2008, s. 2]  
In section 11 -B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for the expression “award” the e xpression 
“award and order” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 2019, s. 2]  

(C) it is necessary in the public interest to do so.  
(2) When the State Government makes a reference to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication of any 
industrial dispute, any submission or any award of an arbitrator with regard to that industrial dispute shall 
stand as cancelled.  
10I. Notice of award to par ties.- (1) The arbitrator or the Industrial Tribunal as an arbitrator, as the 
case may be, shall forward copies of the award made by him or it to the parties, the Commissioner of 

NOTICE OF CHANGE  
9A. Notice of change .—No employer, who proposes to effect any change in the conditions of service 
applicable to any workman in respect of any matter specified in the Fourth Schedu le, shall effect such 
change, — 
(a) without giving to the workmen likely to be affected by such change a notice in the prescribed 
manner of the nature of the cha nge proposed to be effected; or  

exercise, on and from the commencement  of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the Tribunal referred to in section 7D of the Employees' 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952).]  
(2) A Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appointed  by the appropriate Government.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding  officer of a Tribunal unless — 
(a) he is, or has be en, a Judge of a High Court; or  

CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
26. Penalty for illegal strikes and lock -outs. 
27. Penalty for instigation, etc . 
28. Penalty for giving financial aid to illegal strikes and lock -outs. 
29. Penalty for breach of settlement or award . 

(i) any section of an industrial establishment on the working of which the safety of the 
establishment or the workman employed therein depends;  
(ii) any ind ustry which supplies power, light or water to the public;  
(iii) any industry which has been declared by the State Government to be a public utility service 
for the purpose of this Act.  
(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to operate on the e xpiry of a period of six months 

" (aaa) "arbitration proceeding" means - 
(i) any proceeding under Chapter III -A of this Act before an arbitrator, or  
(ii) any proceeding before an Industrial Tribunal in arbitration;  
(aaaa) "arbitrator" means an arbitrator to whom a dispute is referred for arbitration 
under the provisions of Chapter III -A of this Act and includes an umpire;"  
(ii) in clause (b), for the words, figures and letter "under section 10A", the words, 

it is necessary or expedient so to do for securing the public safety or convenience or the maintenance 
of public order or supplies and services essential to th e life of the community or for maintain 
employment or industrial peace in the establishment concerning which such reference has been made, 
it may, by general or special order, make provision, — 
(a) for requiring the employer or workman or both to observe su ch terms and conditions of 
employment s may be specified in the order or as may be determined in accordance with the 

SERVICES UNDER SUB -CLAUSE ( vi) OF CLAUSE ( n) OF SECTION 2 . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. —MATTERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF LABOUR  COURTS . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. —MATT ERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF INDUSTRIAL  TRIBUNALS . 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. —CONDITIONS OF SERVICE FOR CHANGE OF WHICH NOTICE IS TO BE 
GIVEN . 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. —UNFAIR  LABOUR  PRACTICES . 

Insertion of new section 10B. —After section 10A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted namely: — 
“10B. Power to issue order regarding terms and conditions of service pending settlement of 
disputes .—(1) Where an industrial dispute has been referred by the State Government to a Labour 
Court  or a Tribunal under Sub -section ( 1) of section 10 and if in the opinion of the State Government 
it is necessary or expedient so to do for securing the public safety or convenience or the maintenance 

has been appointed.  
6. Courts of Inquiry .—(1) The appropriate Government m ay as occasion arises by notification in the Official 
Gazette constitute a Court of Inquiry for inquiring into any matter appearing to be connected with or relevan t to an 
industrial dispute.  
(2) A Court may consist of one independent person or of such numb er of independent persons as the appropriate 
Government may think fit and where a Court consists of two or more members, one of them shal l be appointed as 

(e) “conciliation proceeding ” means any proceeding held by a conciliation o fficer or Board under 
this Act;  
7[(ee) “controlled industry ” means any industry the control of which by the Union has been 
declared by any Central Act to be exp edient in the public interest;]  
8*    *   *    *    * 
(f) “Court ” means a Court of Inqu iry constituted under this Act;  

be available, the Court shall not act until a new chairman has b een appointed.  
1[7. Labour Courts .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
one or more Labour Courts for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any matter specified in the Second 
Schedule and for performing such ot her functions as may be a ssigned to them under this Act.  
(2) A Labour Court shall consist of one person only to be appointed by the appropriate Government.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding of ficer of a Labour Court, unle ss— 

2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute . 
 
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES UNDER THIS ACT 
3. Works Committee . 
4. Conciliation officers . 

18. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding . 
19. Period of operation of settlements and awards . 
20. Commencement and conclusion of proceedings . 
21. Certain matters to be kept confidential . 
 
CHAPTER V  

substituted.  
[Vide Orissa  Act 5 of 2014 , s. 2]  
4[2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deeme d to be an industrial dispute .—5[(1)] 
Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches, or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected with, 
or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 

3. Omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
4. Certain words omitted by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
5. The words “by the Federal Railway Authority” omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
6. Ins. by Act 65 of 1951, s. 32.  
7. The words “operating a Federal Railway” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
8. Ins. by Act 47 of 1961, s. 51 and the Second Schedule, Part III (w.e.f. 1 -1-1962).  

10G. Dispute to be referred to Industrial Tribunal if no arbitrator appointed .-Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Chapter, if no provision has been made in any submission for the appointment 
of an arbitrator or where by re ason of any circumstances no arbitrator is appointed, such dispute may be 
referred by the State Government for adjudication by the Industrial Tribunal.  
10H. State Government may refer industrial dispute to Industrial Tribunal for adjudication .- 
(1) Notwith standing anything contained in this Chapter the State Government may, at any time, refer an 

locking out; or  
(b) within fourteen  days of giving such notice; or  
(c) before the expiry the date of lock -out specified in a ny such notice as aforesaid; or  
(d) during the pendency of any conciliation proceedings before a conciliation officer and seven 
days after the conclusion of such  proceedings.  
(3) The notice of lock -out or strike under this section shall not be necessary where there is already in 

6*    *    *   *    * 
(4) The appropriate Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint two persons as assessors to advise the 
Tribun al in the proceeding before it.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 7A .—In sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 

a lock -out— 
(a) during the pendency of conciliation proceedings before a Board and seven days after the 
conclusion of such proceedings;  
(b) during the p endency of proceedings before 1[a Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] 
and two months after the c onclusion of such proceedings; 2***  
3[(bb) during the pendency of arbitration proceedings before an arbitrator and two months after 

Act 34 of 1958), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in 
section 9D, for the words "three mo nths next preceding the date of its so applying", the words "at least 
three months during the period of six months immediately preceding the calendar month in which it so 
applies" shall be substituted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 9E, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In section 9E of the principal Act, the existing 

(iii) any travelling concession;  
1[(iv) any commission payable on the promotion  of sales or business or both;]  
but does not include — 
(a) any bonus;  
(b) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund 
or for the benefit of the workman under any l aw for the time being in force;  

8[(ra) “unfair labour practice ” means any of the practices s pecified in the Fifth Schedule;  
(rb) “village industries ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Khadi and 
Village Industries Commission Act, 1956 (61 of 19 56);]  
9[(rr) “wages ” means all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of money, which 
would, if the terms of employment, expressed or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a workman in 
respect of his employment or of work done in such employme nt, and i ncludes — 

1[17B. Payment of full wages to workman pendin g proceedings in higher courts .—Where in any 
case, a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal by its award directs r einstatement of any workman 
and the employer prefers any proceedings against such award in a High Court or the Supreme Court, the 
employer shall be liable to pay such workman, during the period of pendency of such proceedings in the 
High Court or the Supre me Court, full wages last drawn by him, inclusive of any maintenance allowance 
admissible to him under any rule if the workman had not been employed in any establishment during such 

5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
7. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  23 
 Provided also that no proceedings before a Labour Court,  Tribunal or National Tribunal shall lapse 
merely on the ground that any period specified under this sub -section had expired without suc h 
proceedings being completed.]  

(1) Notwith standing anything contained in this Chapter the State Government may, at any time, refer an 
industrial dispute for adjudication by the Industrial Tribunal, if on a report made by the Conciliation . 
Officer or otherwise it is satisfied that - 
(A) by reason o f the continuance of the dispute - 
(a) a serious outbreak of disorder or a breach of the public peace is likely to occur; or  28 
 (b) serious or prolonged hardship to a large section of the community is likely to be 

“(4) A Consiliation  Officer may, if he considers that any document or the testimony of any person 
is relevant or necessary for the settlement or an industrial dispute or for the purpose of verifying the 
implementation of any award or carrying out any other duty imposed on hi m under this Act, call for 
and inspect such document or summon and examine such person. For the aforesaid purposes, the 
Conciliation Officer shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court while trying a suit 
under the Code of civil Procedure, 19 08 (Central Act V of 1908), in respect of the following matters, 

the period aforesaid, until the expiry of two months from t he date on which a notice in writing of an 
intention to terminate the settlement is given by one of the parties to the other part y or parties to the 
settlement.  
10[(3) An award shall, subject to the provisions of this section, remain in operation for  a peri od of one 
year 11[from the date on which the award becomes enforceable under section 17A]:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may reduce the said period and fi x such period as it thinks 

4. Subs. by Act 24 of 1996, s. 2, for “a banking or an insurance company” (w.e.f. 11 -10-1996).  
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
6. Subs. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 2, for “major port, the Central Government, and” (w.e.f  15 -9-2010).  
7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
8. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
9. Clause ( aa) re-lettered as clause ( aaa) by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  

[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 4]  
Amendment of section 9G, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In section 9G of the principal Act - 
(a) in sub -section (1) — 
(i) the words "at any time", occurring after the word "If" shall be deleted; and  
(ii) after the words "for a unit of an industry", the words "at any time after a lapse of two 
years from the date of regis tration of the representative union" shall be inserted; and  

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a disclosure of any such information for 
the purposes of a prosecution under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 36 of 1956,  s. 14, for “the Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. The words “subject to the provision for appeal omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  

operation on such date as is agreed upon by the parties to the  dispute, and if no date is agreed upon, on the 
date on which the memorandum of the settlement is signed  by the parties to the dispute.  
(2) Such settlement shall be binding for such period as is agreed upon by the parties, and if no such 
period is agreed upon, for a period of six months 9[from the date on which the memorandum of settlement 
is signed by the parties to the dispute], and shall continue to be binding on the parties after the expiry of 
the period aforesaid, until the expiry of two months from t he date on which a notice in writing of an 

expression “thirty per cent”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 6]  22 
  
 
CHAPTER III  
REFERENCE OF DISPUTES TO BOARDS, COURTS OR TRIBUNALS  

[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 3]  
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES UNDER THIS ACT 
3. Works Committee .—(1) In the case of any industrial establishment in which one hundred or more 
workmen  are employed or have been employed on any day in the preceding twelve months, the 
appropriate Government may by general or special order require the employer to constitute in the 

National Tribunal shall follow such procedure as the arbitrator or other auth ority concerned may think 
fit.] 
(2) A conciliation of ficer or a member of a Board, 2[or Court or the presiding officer of a Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] may for the purpose of inquiry into any existing or apprehended 
industrial dispute, after giving reasonable notice, enter the premises occupied by any establishmen t to 
which the dispute relates.  

(b) for a period of six months, if the workman, during a period of six calendar months 
preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under 
the employer for not less than — 
(i) ninety -five days, in the case of a workman employed below ground in a mine; and  
(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other case.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( 2), the number of days on which a workman has 

 8[(ia) any service in, or in connection with the worki ng of, any major port 9[or dock  or any 
industrial establishment or unit engaged in essential defence services] ;] 
(ii) any section of an industrial establishment, on the working of which the safety of the 
establishment or the wo rkmen employed therein depends;  
(iii) any postal, telegraph or telephone service;  
(iv) any industry which supplies power , light or water to the public;  

2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
3. Ins. by Act 54 of 1949, s. 3.  9 
 1[(kka) “khadi ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Khadi and Village 
Industries Comm ission Act, 1956 (61 of 1956);]  
2[3[(kkb)] “Labour Court ” means  a Labour Cour t constituted under section 7 ;] 
4[(kkk) “lay-off” (with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions) means the failure, 

(46 of 1982) will come into force: — 
(j) “industry” means any systematic activity carried on by co -operation between an employer a nd his workmen 
(whether such workmen are employed by such employer directly or by or through any agency, including a contractor) for 
the production, supply or distribution of goods or services with a view to satisfy human wants or wishes (not being wants o r 
wishes which are merely spiritual or religious in nature), whether or not, — 
(i) any capital has been invested for the purpose of carrying on such activity; or  

Registrar of Unions for any local area and may, by general or special order, confer on such person all 
or any of the powers of the Registrar of Unions under this Act."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 4]  
Insertion of new Chapter II -B in Central Act XIV of 1947. - After section 9B of the principal Act, 
the following new Chapter shall be inserted, namely: - 
"CHAPTER II -B 

(iv) any industry which supplies power , light or water to the public;  
(v) any system of pu blic conservancy or sanitation;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Clause ( kka) re-lettered as clause ( kkb) by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-8-1984).  

(b) all other parties summoned to appear in the proceedings as parties to t he dispute, unless the 
Board, 6[arbitrator,] 7[Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal], as the case may be, records the 
opinion that they were so  summoned without proper cause;  
(c) where a party referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) is an employer, his heirs, successors or 
assigns in respect of the es tablishmen t to which the dispute relates;  
(d) where a party referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) is composed of workmen, all persons who 

conciliation officer shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Subs. by  Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for “Court or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “and Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  

(8) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the workmen for whom there is an established 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism in the establishment .] 
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 9D, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In the Indus trial Disputes Act, 1947  (Central 
Act 14 of 1947), as amended by the Indus trial Disputes (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 1958 (Rajasthan 
Act 34 of 1958), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in 

(4) The notice of strike referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be given by such numbe r of persons to such 
person or persons and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The notice of lock -out referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be given in su ch manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(6) If on any day an employer receives from any persons employed b y him any such notices as are 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) or gives to any persons employed by him any such notices as are referred to 

the period of ninety days referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Subject to the provisions of su b-section ( 1) and sub -section ( 3) regarding the enforceability of an 
award, the award shall come into operation with effect from such date as may be specified therein, but 
where no date is so specified, it shall  come into operation on the date when the award becomes 
enforceable under sub -section ( 1) or sub - section ( 3), as the case may be.]  
1[17B. Payment of full wages to workman pendin g proceedings in higher courts .—Where in any 

normal wor king hours at least once a day;  
(iii) if such laying -off is due to a strike or slowing -down of production on the part of workmen in 
another part of the establishment.  
25F. Conditions precede nt to retrenchment of workmen .—No workman employed in any industry 
who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retr enched by 
that employer until — 

may be.  
(2) A conciliation proceeding shal l be deemed to have concluded — 
(a) where a settlement is arrived at, when a memorandum of the settlement is signed  by the 
parties to the dispute;  
(b) where no settlement is arrived at, when the report of the conciliation officer is received by the 
appropriate Government or when the report of the Board is published under section 17, as the case 

Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( 2), the number of days on which a workman has 
actually worked under an employer sh all include the days on which — 
(i) he has been laid -off under an agreement or as permitted by standing orders made under the 
Industrial Employment (Standi ng Orders) Act, 1946 (20 of 1946), or under this Act or under any 
other law applicable t o the industrial establishment;  
(ii) he has been on leave with full wages , earned in the previous years;  

years from the date of its registration" shall be inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 4]  
Amendment of Chapter II -B, Central Act No.14 of 1947. - Chapter II -B of the pri ncipal Act, as 
inserted by the Rajasthan Act No. 34 of 1958, shall be renumbered as  
“CHAPTER IIC ”. 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 4]  

7. Subs. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 4, for certain words.  
8. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 16, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
9. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “Court or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  35 
 CHAPTER V  
STRIKES AND LOCK -OUTS  
22. Prohibi tion of strikes and lock -outs.—(1) No person employed in a public utility service shall 

course of conciliation proceeding where such a greement has been signed by the parties thereto in such 
manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to 5[an officer authorised in this behalf 
by] the appropriate Government  and the conciliation officer;]  
(q) “strike ” means a cessation of w ork by a body of persons employed in any industry ac ting in 
combination or a concern ed refusal, or a refusal under a common understanding, of any number of 
persons who are or have been so employed to continue t o work or to accept employment;  

appropriate Government may by general or special order require the employer to constitute in the 
prescribed manner a Works Committee consisting of representatives of employe rs and workmen engaged 
in the establishment so however that the number of representatives of workmen on the Committee shall 
not be less than t he number of representatives of the employer. The representatives of the workmen shall 
be chosen in the prescribed  manner from among the workmen engaged in the establishment and in 
consultation with their trade union, if any, registered under the Indian Trade  Unions Act, 1926  

which the dispute relates.  
(3) Every Board, Court, 3[Labour  Court, Tribunal and National Tribunal] shall have the same powers 
as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit, in 
respect of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him o n oath;  
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects;  

4. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
5. Section 2A numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 24 of 2010, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  12 
 industrial  dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of work men is a party to the 
dispute.]  
1[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section l0, any such workman as is specified in                     
sub-section ( 1) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication of the 

namely: -- 
“(aa) in respect of extensive and indiscriminate armed violence by members of any 
association declared as unlawful association under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 1967, no period commencing from a date earlier than  the date of publication of the 
notification, if any, under section 3 of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 (28 of 
1958) in respect of that area or earlier than two years before the date of publication of the 

every order passed in appeal under  section 9I shall be published in the prescribed manner."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 5]  
4. Conciliation officers .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such number of persons as it thinks fit, to be conciliation officers, charged with the duty of mediating in and 
promoting the set tlement of industrial disputes.  
(2) A conciliation officer may be appointed for a specified area or for specified industries in a specified area or 

of the Registrar as may  be conferred and imposed on him, an Assistant Registrar of 
Unions;  
(oooo) "Representative Union" means a Union for the time being registered as a 
Representative Union under this Act;";  
(vi) after clause (rr), the following new clause shall be inserted, na mely - 
"(rrr) "Union" means a Trade Union of employees registered under the Indian 

 (b) serious or prolonged hardship to a large section of the community is likely to be 
caused; or  
(c) the industry concerned is likel y to be seriously affected or the prospects and scope for 
employment therein curtailed; or,  
(B) the dispute is not likely to be settled by other means; or  
(C) it is necessary in the public interest to do so.  

question relating thereto b y any Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Industrial Tribunal and 
includes an arbitration  award made under section 10A;]  
11[(bb) “banking company ” means a banking company as defined in section 5 of the Banking 
Companies Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), hav ing branches or other establishments in more  than one State, 
and includes 12[the Export -Import Bank of India ,] 13[the Industrial Re construction Bank of India,] 
                                                           

National Tribunal,  
that it will be inexpedient on public grounds affecting national economy or social justice to give effect to 
the whole or any part of the award,  the appropriate Government, or as the case may be, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the award shall not become 
enforceable on the expiry of the said period of thirty days.  
(2) Where any declaration has been  made in relation to an award under the proviso to sub -section ( 1), 

admissible to him under any rule if the workman had not been employed in any establishment during such 
period and an affidavit by such workman had been file d to that effect in s uch Court:  
Provided that where it is proved to the satisfaction of the High Court or the Supreme Court that such 
workman had been employed and had been receiving adequate remuneration during any such period or 
part thereof, the Court shall order that no wa ges shall be payable under this section for such period or 
part, as the case may be.]  

Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated           
(23-10-2020).  
Meghalaya  
Amendment of section 2 (s) of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act No. 14 of 1947). —For 
the existing clause (s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes act, 1947 (Central Act No. 14 of 1947) the 

Tribunal, by a written agreement, refer the dispute to arbitration and the reference shall be to such person 
or persons (including the presiding officer of a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal) as an 
arbitrat or or arbitrators as may be specifie d in the arbitration agreement.  
2[(1A) Where an arbitration agreement provides for a reference of the dispute to an even number of 
arbitrators, the agreement shall provide for the appointment of another person as umpire who shall enter 
upon the reference, if the arbitrators are equally divided in their opinion, and the award of the umpire 

 Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporati on established under section 3 of the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961), or the Central Warehousing 
Corporation established under section 3 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 (58 of 1962), 
or the Unit Trust of  India established under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963  
(52 of 1963), or the Food Corporation of Ind ia established under section 3 or a Board of 
Management established for two or more cont iguous States under section 16 of the Food 

fallen below the minimum required under section 9D for its registration:  16 
 Provided that where a strike or a closure not being an illegal strike or closure 
under this Act in a unit of industry involving more than one -third of the workmen in the 
unit of the industry has extended to a period exceeding fourteen days in any calendar 
month, such month shall be excluded in computing the sa id period of three months:  
Provided further that the registration of a Union shall not be cancelled under the 

4[(e)] he has been the presiding officer of a Labour Court constituted under any Provincial Act or State Ac t 
for not less than five years.  
5[(f) he is or has been a Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) or Joint Commissioner of th e State 
Labour Department, having a degree in law and at least seven years' experience in the labour department 
including three years of experience as Conciliation Officer:  
Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner  shall be appointed 

(b)  in sub -section (2) — 
(i) In clause (a) of the proviso, t he word “and” appearing at the end shall be deleted, and the 
words, letters and brackets, “save in respect of the cases referred to in clause (aa)”, shall be 
inserted in the beginning, and  15 
 (ii) below clause (a) of the pr oviso so amended, the following cla use shall be added, 
namely: -- 

25A. Appl ication of sections 25C to 25E .—(1) Sections 25C to 25E inclusive 4[shall not apply to 
industrial establishments to wh ich Chapter VB applies, or —] 
(a) to industrial establishments in which less than fifty workmen on an average per working day 
have been employed in t he preceding calendar month; or  
(b) to industrial establishments which are of a seasonal  character or in which work is  performed 
only intermittently.  

1[25C. Right of work men laid -off for compensation .—Whenever a workman (other than a badli  
workman or a casual workman) whose name is borne on the muster rolls of an industrial establishment 
and who has completed not less than one year of continuous service under an employer is laid -off, 
wheth er continuously or intermittently, he shall be paid by the employer for all days during which he is so 
laid-off, except for such weekly holidays as may intervene, compensation which shall be equal to fifty per 
cent. of the total of the basic wages and dear ness allowance that would have been payable to h im had he 

Officer that he had sufficient cause for not raising the di spute within the period of three years. ”. 
[Vide Andhra Pradesh 12 of 2015, s . 2] 
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Section 2A .—In sub -section (3), for "three years", substitute "one year".  
[Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second 
Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 

under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, 
discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that disp ute, or whose dismissal, 
discha rge or retrenchment has led  to that dispute, but doe s not include any such person — 
(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Army Act, 1950  
(46 of 1950), or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957); or  
(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or o ther employee of a prison; or  

under sub -section ( 3A), the appropriate Government may, by order, prohibit the continuance of any strike 
or lock -out in connection with such dispute which may be in existence  on the date of the reference.]  
(5) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 194 0), shall apply to arbitrat ion under this section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Insertion of new section 10B. —After section 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 

preceding the date on which the average pay becomes payable if the workman had worked for three 
complete calendar months or four complete weeks or twelve full working days, as the case may be, and 
where such calculation can not be made, the average pay shall be calculated as the average of the wages 
payable to a workman during the period he actually worked;]  
10[(b) “award ” means an interim or a final determination of any industrial dispute or of any 
question relating thereto b y any Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Industrial Tribunal and 

2[(3)] A settlement arrived at in the course of conciliati on proceedings under this Act 3[or an 
arbitration award in a case where a notification has been issued under sub -section ( 3A) of section 10A] or 
4[an award 5[of a Labour Court, Tribuna l or National Tribunal] which has become enf orceable] shall be 
binding on — 
(a) all par ties to the industrial dispute;  
(b) all other parties summoned to appear in the proceedings as parties to t he dispute, unless the 

(i) any section of an industrial establishment on the working of which the safety of the 
establishment or the workmen employed therein depends;  
(ii) any industry which supplies power, light or water to the public;  
(iii) any industry which has been declared by the State Government to be a public utility 
service for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to operate on the expiry of a period of six months 

entitled under the provisions of any award passed by the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 
be."]  
[Vide Kerala Act 30 of 1979, s. 2  ] 
  26 
 Karnataka  
Insertion of new section 10B. —After section 10A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 

vexatiously given or that it would be i nexpedient so to do, make a reference under this  
sub-section notwithstanding that any other proc eedings under this Act in respect of the dispute may have 
commenced:  
4[Provided also that where the dispute in relation to which the Central Government is the appropriate 
Government, it shall be competent for that Government to refer the dispute to a Labour Court or an Industrial 
Tribunal, as the case may be, consti tuted by the State Government. ] 

STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra  Pradesh  
In Section 2A, After the existing sub -section (2), t he following sub -section shall be added, namely: — 
“(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), no such dispute or difference between 
that workman and his employer connected with or arising out of, such  discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute if such dispute is not raised in 

(46 of 1948), or the Central Board of Trustees and the State Boards of Trustees constituted under 
section 5A and section 5B, respectively, of the Employees ’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), 13***, or the Life Insurance Corporatio n of India established 
under section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956), or 14[the Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited registered  under the Companies  Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) ], or the 
                                                           

2[or an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government] togethe r with a memorandum of 
the settlement signed by the parties to the dispute.  
(4) If no such settlement is arrived at, the conciliation officer shall, as soon as practicable after the 
close of the investigation, send to the appropriate Government a full report setting forth the steps taken by 
him for ascertaining the facts and circumstances relating to the dispute and for bringing about a settlement 
thereof, together with a full statement of such facts and circumstances, and the reasons on account of 

(b) any activity relating to the promotion of sales or business or both carried on by an establishment, but does 
not include — 
(1) any agricultural operation except where such agricultural operation is carried on in an integrated manner with any 
other activity (being any such activity as is referred to in the foregoing provisions of this clause) and such other activity  is 
the predominant one.  
Explanation :—For the purposes of this sub -clause, “agricultural operation” does not include any activity carried on in a 

that employer until — 
(a) the workman has been given one month ’s noti ce in writing indicating the reasons for 
retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such 
notice, wage s for the period of the no tice; 
1*    *    *    *   * 
(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenc hment, compensation which shall be 

[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 2019, s. 2]  
12. Du ties of conciliation officers .—(1) Where any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, the 
conciliation officer may, or where the dispute relates to a public utility service and a notice under section 
22 has been given, shall hold conciliation procee dings in the prescribed manner.  
(2) The conciliation officer shall, for the purpose of bringing about a settlement of the dispute, 
without delay, investigate the di spute and all matters affecting the merits and the right settlement thereof 

 1[2***,] 3[the Small Industries Development Bank of India established under section 3 of the Small  
Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989 (39 of 1989),] the Reserve Bank of I ndia, the State 
Bank of India 4[, a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Underta kings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) 5[, a corresponding new bank 
constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1980 (40 of 1980), and any subsidiary bank]] as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 

necessary for registration specified in section 9D and that its membership was during the whole of the 
period of thr ee months immediately preceding the date of the application under this section larger than the 
membership of the representative Union, he shall, subject to the provisions of section 9D, register the 
applicant Union in place of the representative Union.  
(4) Every application made under this section shall be published in the prescribed manner not less 
than fourteen days before the expiry of the period of notice under sub -section (1).  

(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to operate on the e xpiry of a period of six months 
from the date of the order or on the date of the award of the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 
be, whichever is earlier.  
(3) Any money paid by an employer to any person in pursuance of an order under sub -section  (1), 
may be deducted by that employer from out of any monetary benefit to which such person becomes 
entitled under the provisions of any award passed by the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 

order or settlement as if it were a decree passed by it.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 11 .—For sub -section ( 4) of section 11 of the principal Act, the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(4) A Consiliation  Officer may, if he considers that any document or the testimony of any person 

Tribunal] under this section or in a subsequent order, the appropriate Government has specified the points  
of dispute for adjudication, 3[the Labour  Court or the Tribunal or the National Tribunal, as the case may 
be], shall confine its adjudication to those points and matters incidental thereto.  
(5) Where a dispute concerning any establishment or establishments has bee n, or is to be, referred to a 
4[Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] under this section and the appropriate Government is of 
opinion, whether on an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, that the dispute is of such a 

Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner  shall be appointed 
unless he resigns from the service ofthe Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, before being 
appointed as the presiding officer; or  
(g) he is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade Ili with three years' experie nce in the grade.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 4, for section 7 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).   

part, as the case may be.]  
18. Persons on whom sett lements and awards are binding .—2[(1) A settlement arrived at by 
agreement between the employer and workman otherwise than in the course of conci liation proceeding 
shall be binding o n the parties to the agreement.  
  
                                                           

agreement, agree to submit any present or future industrial dispute or class of such disputes to the 
arbitration of any person  whether such arbitrator is named in such agreement or not. Such agreement shall 
be called a submission.  
(2) A copy of every such submission shall be sent to the Registrar who shall register it in the register 
to be maintained for the purpose and shall pub lish it in such manner as may be prescribed.  
10C. Submission when revocable .-Every submission shall in the absence of any provision to the 

4. Subs. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule, for “an award which is declared by the appropriate Government to be binding 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 15”.  
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 9 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
7. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
8. The words “arrived at in the course of a conciliation proceeding under this Act” omitted by  Act 36 of 1956,  s. 14                

appeal  against such order to the Industrial Tribunal:  
Provided that the Industrial Tribunal may, for sufficient reason, admit any appeal made after the 
expiry of such period.  
(2) The Industrial Tribunal may admit an appeal under sub -section (1) if on a perusal of the 
memorandum of appeal and the decision appealed against it finds that the decision is contrary to law or 
otherwise erroneous.  

1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 4, for section 7 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).   
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
3. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 46 of 1982, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
4. Clauses ( a) and ( b) re-lettered as ( d) and ( e) respectively by Act 36 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
5. Ins. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  18 
 7A. Tribunals .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 

REFERENCE OF DISPUTES TO BOARDS, COURTS OR TRIBUNALS  
10. Reference of disputes t o Boards, Courts or Tribunals .—(1) 1[Where the appropriate Government is 
of opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, it may at an y time], by order in writing, — 
(a) refer the dispute to a Board for pro moting a settlement thereof; or  
(b) refer any matter appearing to be connected with or relevant to the dispute to a Court for inquiry; or  
2[(c) refer the dispute or any matter appearing  to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, if it 

Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 5 of 1988, s. 2]  
1[10A. Voluntary re ferenc e of disputes to arbitration .—(1) Where any industrial dispute exists or 
is apprehended and the employer and the workmen agree to refer the dispute to arbitration, they may, at 
any time before the dispute has been referred under section 10 to a Labour Court or Tribunal or National 
Tribunal, by a written agreement, refer the dispute to arbitration and the reference shall be to such person 

following new section shall be inserted, namely: - 
"10K. State Government may lay down terms and conditions of employment and 
prohibit strikes, etc. - (1) Notwithstanding any thing contained in the Act, if in the opinion of the 
State Government, it is necessary or expedient so to do, for securing the public safety or 
convenience or the maintenance of public order or supplies and services essential to th e life of the 
community or for maintaining employment or maintaining industrial peace, it may by a general or 

9C. Setting up of Grievance Redressal Machinery. —(1) Every industrial establishment 
employing twenty or more workmen shall have one or more Grievance Redressal Committee for the 
resolution of disputes arising out of individual grievances.  
(2) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of equal number of members from the 
employer and the workmen.  
(3) The chairperson of the Grievance Redressal Committee shall be selected from the employer and 

3. Clause ( kka) re-lettered as clause ( kkb) by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-8-1984).  
4. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2, for “or for any other reason” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
7. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
8. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  

12. Ins. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 2.  8 
 1[(j) “industry ” means any business, trade, undertaking, manufacture or calling  of employers and 
includes any calling, service, employment, handicraft, or industrial occupation  or avocation of 
workmen;  
(k) “industrial dispute ” means any dispute or difference between  employers and employers, or 
between employers and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the 

(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding of ficer of a Labour Court, unle ss— 
2[(a) he is, or has be en, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) he has, for a period of not less than three years, been a District Judge or an Additional District Judge; or  
3*    *    *   *    *  
4[(d)] he has held any judicial office in India fo r not less than seven years; or  
4[(e)] he has been the presiding officer of a Labour Court constituted under any Provincial Act or State Ac t 

25FF. Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings . 
25FFA. Sixty days’ notice to be given of intention to close down any undertaking . 
25FFF. Compensation to workmen in case of closing down of undertakings . 
25G. Procedure for retrenchment . 
25H. Re -employment of retrenched workmen . 
25-I. [Repealed .] 

Act, 1980 (40 of 1980), and any subsidiary bank]] as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959);]  
(c) “Board ” means a Board of Conciliat ion constituted under this Act;  
6[(cc) “closure ” means the permanent closing down of a place of employment or part thereof;]  
(d) “conciliation officer ” means a conciliation of ficer appoint ed under this Act;  
(e) “conciliation proceeding ” means any proceeding held by a conciliation o fficer or Board under 

shall be deemed to be an industrial  establishment or undertaking;]  
3[(kk) “insurance company ” means an insurance company as defined in section 2 of the Insurance 
Act, 1938  (4 of 1938), having branches or other establish ments in more than one State;]  
                                                           
1. Clause ( j) shall stand substituted as follows when clause ( c) of section 2 of the Industrial  Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982  
(46 of 1982) will come into force: — 

and Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, Civil Services 
(Temporary Service) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil Service Regulations, Civilians in Defence 
Services (Classification, Control and Appea l) Rules or the Indian Railway Establishment Code or any 
other rules or regulations that may be notified in this behalf by the appropriate Government in the 
Official Gazette, apply.  
9B. Power of Government to exempt .—Where the appropriate Government is of  opinion that the 

(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Army Act 1950 (46 of 1950), or 
the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957); or  
(ii) Who is employed in the police service o r as an Officer or other employee of a person; or  
(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or  
(iv) Who being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding one thousand six 
hundred rupees per mensem  or exercises,  either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or 

bound by the award.  
(6) Notwithstanding the expiry of the period of operation under su b-section ( 3), the award shall 
continue to be binding on the parties until a period of two months has elapsed from the date on which 
notice is given by any party bound by the award to the other party or parties intimating its in tention to 
terminate the awa rd. 
3[(7) No notice given under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 6) shall have effect, unless it is given by a 

and for certain other purposes here inafter appearing;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short t itle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947.  

Provided that no person shall at an y time be deemed to be a member if his 
subscription is in arrears for a period of three months or more next preceding such time;";  14 
 (iv) in clause (g), after sub -clause (ii), the following sub -clause shall be inserted, namely - 
" (iii) where the owner of any  industry in the course of or for the purpose of conducting 
the industry contracts with any person for the execution by or under the contractor of the 
whole or any part of any work which is ordinarily a part of the industry, the owner of the 

the following new Chapter shall be inserted, namely: - 
"CHAPTER III -A. 
Arbitration.  
10B. Submission .-(1) Any employer and a Representative Union or, in the absence of any registered 
Representative Union, any other Union which is representative of employees may, by a written 
agreement, agree to submit any present or future industrial dispute or class of such disputes to the 

operation.  
(4) Where the appropriate Government, whether of its own motion or on the application of any party 
bound by the award, considers that since the award was made, there has been a material change in the 
circumstances on which it was based, the appropri ate Government may re fer the award or a part of it 12[to 
a Labour Court, if the award was that of a Labour Court or to a Tribunal, if the award was that of a 
Tribunal or of a National Tribunal] for decision whether the period of operation should not, by rea son of 

6. Subs. by Act 46 of 19 82, s. 10, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  32 
 (2) The award of a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be in wr iting and shall be 
signed by its presiding officer.  
17. Publ ication of reports and awards .—(1) Every report of a Board or Court together with any 
minute of dissent recorded therewith, every arbitration award and every award of a Labour  Court, 
Tribunal or National Tribunal shall, within a period of thirty days from the date of its receipt by the 

without delay, investigate the di spute and all matters affecting the merits and the right settlement thereof 
and may do all such things as he thinks fit for the purpose of inducing the parties to come to a fair and 
amic able settlement of the dispute.  
(3) If a settlement of the dispute or of any of the matters in dispute is arrived at in the course of the 
conciliation proceedings the conciliation officer shall send a report thereof to the appropriate Government 
2[or an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government] togethe r with a memorandum of 

(a) “appropriate Government ” means — 
(i) in relation to any  industrial dispute concerning 4*** any industry carried on by or under 
the author ity of the Central Government, 5*** or by a railway company 6[or concerning any such 
controlled industry as may be specified in this beh alf by the Central Government] 7*** or in 
relation to an industri al dispute concerning 8[9[10[11[a Dock Labour Board established under 
section 5A of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 194 8), or 12[the 

(ii) he has been on leave with full wages , earned in the previous years;  
(iii) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by  accident arising out of and in 
the course of his employment; and  
(iv) in the case of a female, she has been on maternity leave; so, however, that the total period 
of such maternity leave does not exceed twelve wee ks.] 
1[25C. Right of work men laid -off for compensation .—Whenever a workman (other than a badli  

(d) where a party referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) is composed of workmen, all persons who 
were employed in the establishment or part of the establishment, as the case may be, to which the 
dispute relates on  the date of the dispute and all persons who subsequently become employed  in that 
establishment or part.  
19. Period of operat ion of settlements and awards .—(1) A settlement 8*** shall come into 
operation on such date as is agreed upon by the parties to the  dispute, and if no date is agreed upon, on the 

CHAPTER V  
STRIKES AND LOCK -OUTS  
22. Prohibition of strikes and lock -outs. 
23. General prohibition of strikes and lock-outs. 
24. Illegal strikes and lock -outs. 
25. Prohibition of financial aid to illegal strikes and lock -outs. 

parties to the arbitration agreement but are concerned in the dispute, shall be given an opportunity of 
presenting their case before the arbitrator or arbitrators.]  
(4) The arbitrator or arbitrators shall investigate the dispute and subm it to the appropriate 
Government the arbitration award signed by the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may be.  
2[(4A) Where an industrial dispute has been referred to arbitration and a notification has been issued 
under sub -section ( 3A), the appropriate Government may, by order, prohibit the continuance of any strike 

1987, whichever is later, apply, in the prescribed manner, to the Labour Court for adjudication of the 
dispute and the Labour Court dispose of such application in the same manner as a dispute referred 
under sub -section ( 1). 
Note .—An application under sub -section ( 4A), may be made even in respect of a dispute pending 
consideration of the Government for reference, on the date of commencement of the Industrial 
Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987.”  

conciliation officer and the appropr iate Government shall, within 3[one month] from the date of the 
receipt of such copy, publish th e same in the Official Gazette.  
2[(3A) Where an industrial dispute has been referred to arbitration and the appropriate Government is 
satisfied that the persons ma king the reference represent the majority of each party, the appropriate 
Government may, within the time referred to in sub -section ( 3), issue a notification in such manner as 
                                                           

Amendment of section 9E, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In section 9E of the principal Act, the existing 
section shall be numbered as sub section (1) and after sub -section (1) so re -numbered,   the following new 
sub-section shall be  inserted, namely: -  
"(2) Once a union has been registered as a representative union under this Act, the registration of the 
union shall be held valid for a period of two years from the date of its registration and shall continue to 
hold valid unless the registration is cancelled under section 9F o f this Act or another union is registered in 

(2) A conciliation officer may be appointed for a specified area or for specified industries in a specified area or 
for one or more specified industries and either permanently or for a limited period.  
5. Board of Conciliation .—(1) The appropriate Government may as occasion arises by notification in the 
Official Gazette constitute a Board of Conciliation for promoting the settlement of an industr ial disp ute. 
(2) A Board shall consist of a chairman and two or four other members, as the app ropriate Government thinks 
fit. 

shall not be deemed to have been laid -off for th e second half of the shift for the day and shall be 
entitled to full basic wages and dearness allowance for that part of the day ;] 
(l) “lock-out” means the  6[temporary closing of a place of employment] , or the suspension of 
work, or the refusal by an employer to continue to employ any number of persons employed by him;  
7[(la) “major port ” means a major port as defined in clause ( 8) of section 3 of the India n Ports 
Act, 1908 (15 of 1908);  

of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such 
contract being terminated under a stipulation in tha t behalf contained therein; or]  
(c) termination of the service of a workman on the g round of co ntinued ill -health;]  
4[(p) “settlement ” means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and 
includes a written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the 
course of conciliation proceeding where such a greement has been signed by the parties thereto in such 

manner of the nature of the cha nge proposed to be effected; or  
(b) within twenty -one d ays of giving such notice:  
Provided that no notice shall be required for effecting any suc h change — 
(a) where the change is effected in pursuance of any 2[settlement or award]; or  
(b) where the workmen likely to be affected by the change are persons to who m the Fundamental 
and Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, Civil Services 

the proceeding in relation to such matte r before the National Tribunal.  
6[Explanation .—In this sub -section, “Labour Court ” or “Tribunal ” includes any Court or Tribunal  
or other authority constituted under any law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial 
disputes in force in any State.]  
(7) Where any industrial dispute, in relation to which the Central Government is not the appropriate 
Government, is referr ed to a National Tribunal, then notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any 

5[15. Duties of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tri bunals .—Where an industrial dispute 
has been referred to a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for adjudication, it shall hold its 
proceed ings expeditiously and shall, 6[within the period speci fied in the order referring such industrial 
dispute or the further period extended under the second proviso to sub -section ( 2A) of section 10], submit 
its award to the appropriate Government.  
16. Form of report or award .—(1) The report of a Board or Court  shall be in writing and shall be 

"CHAPTER II -B 
Registration of Unions.  
9C. Maintenance of register .-It shall be the duty of the Registrar to maintain in such form a s may be 
prescribed a register of Unions registered by him under the provisions of this Act.  
9D. Application for Registration .-Any Union which has for the whole of the period of three months 
next preceding the date of its so applying under this section a m embership of not less than fifteen per cent. 

following new section shall be inserted, namely - 
"3A. Registrar and Assistant Registrar .-(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint a person to be the Registrar of Unions for the purpose of this Act for the 
whole of the State.  
(2) The State Government may, by similar notification, appoint a pers on to be the Assistant 
Registrar of Unions for any local area and may, by general or special order, confer on such person all 

(2) Where any declaration has been  made in relation to an award under the proviso to sub -section ( 1), 
the appropriate Government or the Central Government may, within ninety days from the date of 
publication of the award under section 17, make an order rejecting or modifying the award, and  shall, on 
the first available opportunity, lay the award together with a copy of the order before the Legislature of 
the State, if the order has been made by a State Government, or before Parliament, if the order has been 
made by the Central Government.  

retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute if such dispute is not raised in 
conciliation proceeding within a period of three years from the date of such discharg e, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination:  
Provided that an authority, as may be specified by the State Government, may consider to extend 
the said period of three years when the applicant workman satisfies the authority that he had sufficient 
cause for no t raising the dispute within the period of three years.”.  

Amendment of section 7A .—In sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 
14 of 1947) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause ( a), the following cla use shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“(aa) he is, or has been a District Judge, or ” 
[Vide Karnataka Act 6 of 1963, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 7A .—In clause ( aa) of sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial 

25B. Definition of continuous service . 
25C. Right of workmen laid -off for  compensation . 
25D. Duty of an employer to maintain muster rolls of workmen . 
25E. Workmen not entitled to compensation in certain cases . 
25F. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen . 
25FF. Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings . 

thereof, together with a full statement of such facts and circumstances, and the reasons on account of 
whic h, in his opinion, a settlement could not be arrived at.  
(5) If, on a consideration of  the report referred to in sub -section ( 4), the appropriate Government is 
satisfied that there is a c ase for reference to a Board, 3[Labour Court , Tribunal or National Tr ibunal ], it 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  

(i) it is commenced or declared in contravention of section 22 or section 23; or  
(ii) it is continued in contravention of an order made under sub -section ( 3) of section 10 1[or  
sub-section ( 4A) of section 10A].  
(2) Where a strike or lock -out in pursuance of an industrial dispute has already commenced and is in 
existence at the time of the referen ce of the dispute to a Board, 4[an arbitrator, a] 2[Labour Court, Tribunal 
or National Tribunal], the continuance of such strike or lock -out shall not be deemed to be illegal, 

an arbitrator], as the case may be, that such information shall be treated as confidential; nor shall such 
conciliation officer or any in dividual member of the Board, 9[or Court or the presiding officer of the 
Labour Court, T ribunal or National Tribunal or the arbitrator] or any person present at or concerned in the 
proceedings disclose any such information without the consent in writing of the secretary of the trade 
union or the person, firm or company in question, as the cas e may be:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a disclosure of any such information for 

  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE, POWERS AND DUTIES OF AUTHORITIES  
SECTIONS  
11. Procedure and powers of conciliation officers, Boards, Courts and Tribunals . 
11A. Powers of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in case of 

respect of such matters.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Manipur  
In section 3 of the Disturbed Areas (Special Courts) Act, 1976, (hereinafter referred to as the 
Principal Act): -- 

in any industrial  establishment have been laid -off, it shall be the duty of every employer to maintain for 
the purposes of this Chapter a muster roll and to provide for the making of entries therein by workmen 
who may present themselves for work at the establishment at the  appointed ti me during normal working 
hours.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 5, for section 25C ( w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  38 

(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects;  
(c) issuing commissions fo r the examination of witnesses;  
(d) in respect of such othe r matters as may be prescribed;  
and every inquiry or i nvestigation by a Board, Court, 4[Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal], 
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).  

2[(c) refer the dispute or any matter appearing  to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, if it 
relates to any matter specified in the Second Schedule, to a Labour Court for adjudication ; or 
(d) refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, whethe r 
it relates to any matter specified in the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, to a Tribunal for 
adjudication:  
Provided that where the dispute relates to any matter specified in the Third Schedule and is not likely to 

7. Ins. by Act 65 of 1951, s. 32.  
8. Omitted by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “a Government in British India”.  
10. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
11. Clause ( h) omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
12. Ins. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 2.  8 

chairman or any other member of a Board or Court, then, in the case of a National Tribunal, the Central 
Government and in any other case, the appropriate Government, shall appoint another person in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy, and the proceeding may be continued 
before the Labour Court, Tribunal, National Tribunal, Board or Court, as the case may be, from the stage 
at which the vacancy is filled.  
9. Finality of or ders constituting Boards, etc .—(1) No order of the appropriate Government or of 

                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962 , s. 3 and the schedule (w.e.f. 19 -12-1962) ; to 
Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963); and Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and 
the Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 2, for the sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 29 -8-1956).  
3. Omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  

National Tribunal] shall be deemed to have  commenced on the date or the 6[reference of the dispute for 
arbitration or adjudication, as the case may be] and such proceedings shall be de emed to have concluded 
7[on the date on which the award becomes enforceable under section 17A].  
21. Certain ma tters to be kept confidential .—There shall not be included in any report or award 
under this Act any information obtained by a conciliation offi cer, Board, Court, 8[Labour  Court, Tribunal, 
National Tribunal or an arbitrator] in the course of any investigation or inquiry as to a trade union or as to 

National Tribunal or an arbitrator] in the course of any investigation or inquiry as to a trade union or as to 
any individual business (whether carried on by a person, firm or company) which is not available 
otherwise than through the evi dence given befor e such officer, Board, Court, 6[Labour Court,  Tribunal, 
National Tribunal or an arbitrator], if the trade union, person, firm or company, in question has made a 
request in writing to the conciliation officer, Boar d, Court, 6[Labour Court, Tribunal, National Tribunal or 
an arbitrator], as the case may be, that such information shall be treated as confidential; nor shall such 

7B. National Tribunals . 
7C. Disqualifications for the presiding officers of Labour  Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals . 
7D. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer.  
8. Filling of vacancies . 
9. Finality of orders constituting Boards, etc . 
 

hundred rupees per mensem  or exercises,  either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or 
by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly or a managerial nature.”  
[Vide Meghalaya Act 5 of 2009, s. 2]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 2, Central Act No. 14 of   1947. - In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(Central Act No. 14 of 1947), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the 

fit. 
(3) The chairman shall be an independent person and the other members shall be persons appointed in equal 
numbers to represent the  parties to the dispute and any person appointed to represent a party shall be appointed on 
the recommendation of that party:  
Provided that, if any party fails to make a recommendation as aforesaid within the prescribed time, the 
appropriate Government sha ll appoint such persons as it thin ks fit to represent that party.  

Principal Act): -- 
 (a) in sub -section (1), between the words, “communities”, and “it may”, the following words, 
brackets and figures shall be inserted, namely — 
“or by reason of extension and indiscriminate armed violence by members of an association 
declared as unlawful association under the Unla wful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967”;  
(b)  in sub -section (2) — 

cent. of the total of the basic wages and dear ness allowance that would have been payable to h im had he 
not been so laid -off: 
Provided that if during any period of twelve months, a workman is so laid -off for more than forty -five 
days, no such compensation shall be payable in respect of any period of t he lay -off after the expiry of the 
first forty -five days, if there is an agreement to that effect between the workman and the employer:  
Provided further that it shall be lawful for the employer in any case falling within the foregoing 

[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 2A, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - In section 2A of the principal Act, after 
the existing sub -section (3), the following new sub -section shall be added, namely: - 
“(4) Notwithstanding anything in sub -sections (1), (2) and (3), no such dispute or difference 
between that workman and his emplo yer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute if such dispute is not raised in 

1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 5, for section 25C ( w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  38 
 25E. Workmen not entitled to compensation in certain cases .—No compensation shall be paid to a 
workman who has been laid -off— 
(i) if he refuses to accept any alternative employment in the same establishment from  which he 
has been laid -off, or in any other establishment belonging to the same employer situate in the same 
town or village or situate within a radius of five miles from the establishment to which he belongs, if, 

or National Tribunal], the continuance of such strike or lock -out shall not be deemed to be illegal, 
provided that such strike or lock -out was not at its commencement in contravention of the provisions of 
this Act or the continuance thereof was not prohibited under sub -section ( 3) of section 10 4[or su b-section 
(4A) of section 10A].  
(3) A lock -out declared in consequence of an illegal strike or a strike declared in consequence of an 
illegal lock -out shall not be deem ed to be illegal.  

[Vide Kerala Act 12 of 2017, s. 2]  
Assam  
Amendment of section 2 .—In the principal Act, in section 2, in clause (s) , in between the words 
“or supervisory work” and “for hire or reward”, the words ‘or any work for the promotion of sales”, 
shall be inserted.  
[Vide Assam Act 22 of 200 7, s. 2]  

Amendment) Act, 1953 (Mysore Act 15 of 1953), shall be omitted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 1 of 1960, s. 2]  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 10 .—In the industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 1947) 
(hereinafter  referred to as the principal Act), in section 10, after sub -section (4), the following sub -section 
shall be inserted  namely: — 

Government may think fit and where a Court consists of two or more members, one of them shal l be appointed as 
the chairman.  
(3) A Court, having the prescribed quorum, may act notwithstanding the absence of the c hairman or any of its 
member s or any vacancy in its number:  
Provided that, if the appropriate Government notifies the Court that the services of the chairman have ceased to 
be available, the Court shall not act until a new chairman has b een appointed.  

                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 3, for “If any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, the appropriate Government may”.  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  

appropriate Government or when the report of the Board is published under section 17, as the case 
may be; or  
(c) when a reference is made to a Court, 4[Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] under 
section 10 during the penden cy of conciliation proceedings.  
(3) Proceedings 5[before an arbitrator under section 10A or before a Labour Court, Tribunal or 
National Tribunal] shall be deemed to have  commenced on the date or the 6[reference of the dispute for 

(a) voluntary retirement of the wor kman; or  
(b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of 
employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a  stipulation in that 
behalf; or  
3[(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non -renewal of the contract 
of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such 

THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. —UNFAIR  LABOUR  PRACTICES . 
 
 
 
 
 

service for not less than one year in that undertaking immediately before such transfer shall be entitled to 
notice and compensation in accordance with the provisions of s ection 25F, as if t he workman had been 
retrenched:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a workman in any case where there has been a 

"(rrr) "Union" means a Trade Union of employees registered under the Indian 
Trade Unions Act, 1926 (Central Act XVI of 1926);"; and  
(vii) in clause (s), after the words "employed in any industry", the words "by an employer 
or by a contractor in relat ion to the execution of his contract with such employer" shall be 
inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 3]  

philanthropic service; or  
(5) khadi or village industr ies; or  
(6) any activity of the Government relatable to the sovereign functions of the Government including all the activities 
carried on by the departments of the Central Government dealing with defence research, atomic energy and space; or  
(7) any domest ic service; or  
(8) any activity, being a profession practised by an individual or body of individuals, if the number of persons 

only intermittently.  
(2) If a question arises whether an industrial establishment is of a seasonal character or whether work 
is performed therein only intermittently, the decision of the appropriate Gov ernment there on shall be 
final.  
5[Explanation .—In this section and in sections 25C, 25D and 25E, “industrial establishment ” 
means — 

preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under 
the employer for not less than — 
(i) one hundre d and ninety days in the case of a workman emplo yed below ground in a 
mine; and  
(ii) two hundred and  forty days, in any other case;  
(b) for a period of six months, if the workman, during a period of six calendar months 

persons who are or have been so employed to continue t o work or to accept employment;  
6[(qq) “trade union ” means a trade union registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926  
(16 of 1926);]  
7[(r) “Tribunal ” means an Industrial Tribunal constituted under section 7A and includes an 
Industrial Tribunal constituted before the 10th day of March, 1957, unde r this  Act;]  
8[(ra) “unfair labour practice ” means any of the practices s pecified in the Fifth Schedule;  

(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or o ther employee of a prison; or  
(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial  or administrative capacity; or  
(iv) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding 3[ten thousand 
rupees ] per mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by 
reason of the powers vested in him, functions  mainly of a managerial nature. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  

that the provisions of the said section shall not apply or shall apply, subject to su ch conditions as may be 
specified in the notification, to that class of industrial establishments or to that class of workmen 
employed in  any industrial establishment.]  
3[CHAPTER IIB  
GRIEVANCE  REDRESSAL  MACHINERY  
9C. Setting up of Grievance Redressal Machinery. —(1) Every industrial establishment 

2. The words “the Industrial Development Bank of India” omitted by Act 53 of 2003, s. 12 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 2 -7-2004).  
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 1989, s. 53 and the Second Schedule (date to be notified).  
4. Subs. by Act 5 of 1970, s. 20, for “and any subsidiary bank” (w.e.f. 19 -7-1969).  
5. Subs. by Act 40 of 1980, s. 20 (w.e.f. 15 -4-1980).  
6. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
7. Ins. by Act 65 of 1951, s. 32.  

reference to the State Gover nment.]  
7[(8) No proceedings before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal in relation to an industrial 
dispute shall lapse merely by reason of the death of any of the parties to the dispute being a workman, and 
such Labour Court, Tribunal or Nation al Tribunal shall complete such proceedings and submit its award 
to the appropriate Government.]  
  

Explanation .—”Badli  workman ” means a workman who is employed in an industrial establishment in 
the place of another workman whose name is borne on the muster rolls of the establishment,  but shall 
cease to be regarded as such for the purposes of this section, if he has completed one year of continuous  
service in the establishment.]  
25D. Duty of an employer to maintain muster rolls of wo rkmen .—Notwithstanding that workmen 
in any industrial  establishment have been laid -off, it shall be the duty of every employer to maintain for 

referred to in sub -section ( 1) or gives to any persons employed by him any such notices as are referred to 
in sub -section ( 2), he shall within five days thereof report to the appropriate Government or to such 
authority as that  Government may prescribe the number of such notices  received or given on that day.  
23. General prohibi tion of strikes and lock -outs.—No workman who is employed in any industrial 
establishment shall go on strike in breach of contract and no employer of any  such wor kman shall declare 
a lock -out— 

(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenc hment, compensation which shall be 
equivalent to fifte en days' average pay 2[for every completed year of continuous service] or any part 
there of in excess of six months; and  
(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government 3[or such authority 
as may be specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Offic ial Gazette].  
STATE AMENDMENT  

are to be paid, and to give al l necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid and such costs may, on 
application made to the appropriate Government by the person entited, be recovered by that Government 
in the same manner  as an arrear of land revenue.]  
3[(8) Every 4[Labour Court, Tri bunal or National Tribunal] shall be deemed to be Ci vil Court for the 
purposes of 5[sections 345, 346 and 348 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974 )].]  
6[(9) Every award made, order issued or settlement arrived at by or before Labour  Court or Tribunal 

service, the appropriate Government does not make a reference  to a 3[Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal] under section 10, it shall record and communicate to the parties concerned its reasons t herefor.  
(5) The Board shall submit its report under this section w ithin two months of the date 4[on which the 
dispute was referred to it] or within such shorter period as may be fixed  by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that the appropriate Government  may from time to time extend the time for the submission 
of the report by such further periods not exceeding two months in the aggregat e: 

(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to operate on the expiry of a period of six months 
from the date of order or on the date of the award of the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may be, 
whichever is earlier.  
(3) Any money paid by an employer to any person in pursuance of any order under sub -section ( 1) 
may be deducted by that employer from out of any monetary b enefit to which such person becomes 
entitled under the provisions of any award passed by the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 

continue the submission for such fu rther period as may be agreed upon between them.  
10D. Proceedings in arbitration .-The proceedings in arbitration under this Chapter shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (Central Act X of 1940) in so far as they are 
applic able and the powers which are exercisable by a Civil Court under the said provisions shall be 
exercisable by the Industrial Tribunal.  
10E. Special case may be stated to Industrial Tribunal .- The arbitrator may refer any question of 

extend to five hundred rupees or with both.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 5 of 1988, s. 4]  
1[11A. Powers of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in 
case of disc harge or dismissa l of workmen .—Where an industrial dispute relating to the discharge or 
dismissal of a workman has been referred to a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for 
adjudication and, in the course of the adjudication proceedings, the Labour Court, Tribunal  or National 

13. Duties of Board .—(1) Where a dispute has been referred to a Board under this Act, it shall be the 
duty of the Board to endeavour  to bring about a settlement of the same and for this purpose the Board 
shall, in such manner as it thinks fit and without delay, investigate the dispute and all matters affecting the 
merits and the right settlement thereof and may do all such things as it  thinks fit for the purpose of 
inducing the parties to come to a fair and amic able settlement of the dispute.  
(2) If a settlement of the dispute or of any of the matters in dispute is arrived at in the course of the 

Tribunals. —No person shall be appointed to, or continue in, the office of the presiding officer of a 
Labour Court, Trib unal or National Tribunal, if — 
(a) he i s not an independent person; or  
(b) he has attaine d the age of sixty -five years.]  
2[7D. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, 

4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 9, for “may call for” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
6. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9 (w.e.f. 17 -9-1956).  29 
 Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 1[in respect of enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him or 
of compellin g the production of documents] ]. 
2[(5) A Court, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal may, if it so thinks fit, appoint one or 

provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they 
apply in relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government.  
(3) The application referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be made to the Labour Court or Tribunal before 
the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified in sub -section ( 1).] 
STATE AMENDMENT  

the existing clause (s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes act, 1947 (Central Act No. 14 of 1947) the 
following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“(S) “Workmen” means any person (including an apprentice) employed  in any industry to do any 
manual skilled or  unskilled, technical, sales promotion, operational, clerical or supervisory work or 
any work for the promotion of sales for hire or r eward, whether the terms of employment be 
expressed or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding under this act in relation to an industrial 

town or village or situate within a radius of five miles from the establishment to which he belongs, if, 
in the opinion of the employer, such alte rnative employment does not call for any special skill or 
previous experience and can be done by the workman, provided that the wages which would normally 
have been paid to the workman are offered for t he alternative employment also;  
(ii) if he does not pr esent himself for work at the establishment at the appointed time during 
normal wor king hours at least once a day;  

2. The words “subject to the provision for appeal omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 10 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956,  s. 15, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f.  10-3-1957).  
5. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “before a Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “reference of a dispute for adjudication” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
7. Subs. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 4, for certain words.  

case may be, shall forward copies of the award made by him or it to the parties, the Commissioner of 
Labour, the Registrar and the State Government.  
(2) On receipt of such award,  the Registrar shall enter it in the register kept for the purpose.  
10J. Completion of proceeding .- The arbitration proceeding shall be deemed to have completed 
when the award is published under section 17."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 6]  

(6) A report under this section shall be submitted within fourteen days of t he commencement of the 
conciliation proceedings or within such shorter period as may be fixed by the appropriate Government:  
1[Provided that, 2[subject to the approval of the conciliation officer,] the time for the submission of 
the report may be extended by such period as may be agreed upon in writing by all the parties to the 
dispute.]  
13. Duties of Board .—(1) Where a dispute has been referred to a Board under this Act, it shall be the 

(ii) in clause (b), for the words, figures and letter "under section 10A", the words, 
figures and letter "under Chapter III -A" shall be substitut ed; 
(iii) after clause (eee) the following new clause shall be inserted, namely - 
"(eeee) "member" means a person who is an ordinary member of a Union 
and who has paid a subscription of not less than four annas per month:  
Provided that no person shall at an y time be deemed to be a member if his 

Labour Court or Tribunal, the proceeding before the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may  
be, in so far as it relates to such matter, shall be deemed to have been q uashed on such referenc e to 
the National Tribunal; and  
(b) it shall not be lawful for the appropriate Government to refer the matter under adjudication 
before the National Tribunal to any Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication during the pendency of 
the proceeding in relation to such matte r before the National Tribunal.  

Provided that where the dispute relates to any matter specified in the Third Schedule and is not likely to 
affect more than one hundred workmen, the appropriate Government may, if it so thinks fit, make the reference 
to a Labour Court under clause ( c):] 
3[Provided further that] where the dispute relates to a public utility service and a notice under section 22 
has been given, the appropriate Government shall, unless it considers that the notice has been frivolously or 
vexatiously given or that it would be i nexpedient so to do, make a reference under this  

respect of his employment or of work done in such employme nt, and i ncludes — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 for “Schedule” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -8-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3, for clause ( p) (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  

1958) in respect of that area or earlier than two years before the date of publication of the 
notification under sub -section (1), sh all be specified therein; and “.  
[Vide Manipur Act 11 of 1982, s. 2]  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new section 3A, in Central Act XIV of 1947. -After section 3 of the principal Act, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely - 

sub-section ( 1) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication of the 
dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty -five days from the date he has made the application to 
the Conciliation Officer of the appro priate Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of 
such application the Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in ac cordance with the 
provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they 

                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 11 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  33 
 (2) 1[Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), an arbitration award] which has become enforceable 
shall be binding on the parties to the agreement who referred the dispute to arbitration.]  
2[(3)] A settlement arrived at in the course of conciliati on proceedings under this Act 3[or an 

proceedings being completed.]  
(3) Where an industrial dispute has been referred to a Board, 1[Labour Court, Tribunal o r National 
Tribunal] under this section, the appropriate Government may by order prohibit the continuance of any 
strike or lock -out in connection with such dispute which may be in existence on the date of the reference.  
1[(4) Where in an order referring an industrial dispute to 2[a Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal] under this section or in a subsequent order, the appropriate Government has specified the points  

9B. Power of Government to exempt .—Where the appropriate Government is of  opinion that the 
application of the provisions of section 9A to any class of industrial establishments or to any class of 
workmen employed in any industrial establishment affect the employers in relation thereto so 
prejudicially that such application may cause serious repercussion on the industry concerned and that 
public interest so requires, the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that the provisions of the said section shall not apply or shall apply, subject to su ch conditions as may be 

Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated           
(23-10-2020). ] 
4[25FF. Compensation to workmen in cas e of transfer of undertakings .—Where the ownership or 
management of an undertaking is transferred, whether by agreement or by operation of law, from the 
employer in rela tion to that undertaking to a new employer, every workman who has been in continuous 
service for not less than one year in that undertaking immediately before such transfer shall be entitled to 

necessary or expedient so to do for securing the public safety or convenience or the maintenance of 
public order or supplies and services essential to the life of the community or for maintaining 
employment or industri al peace in the establishment concerning which such reference has been made, 
it may, by general or  special order, make provision — 
(a) for requiring the employers or workmen or both to observe such terms and conditions of 
employment as may be specified in t he order or as may be determined in accordance with the order, 

it is the appropriate Government in relation to that dispute, at any time, by order in wri ting, refer the dispute or any 
matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, whether it relates to any matter specified in the 
Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, to a National  Tribunal for adjudication.]  
(2) Where the parties to a n industrial dispute apply in the prescribed manner, whether jointly or separately, for a 
reference of the dispute to a Board, Court , 6[Labo ur Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal], the appropriate 
Government, if satisfied that the persons applying represe nt the majority of each party, shall make the 

4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3, for clause ( p) (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  
5. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
6. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
7. Subs. by Act 18 of 1957, s. 2, for clause ( r) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
8. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
9. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  11 

                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1996,  s. 2,  for “the International Airports Authority of India constituted under section 3 of the International 
Airports Authority of India Act, 1971 (48 of 1971)” (w.e.f. 11 -10-1995).  
2. Ins. by Act 53 of 1987, s. 56 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 9 -7-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 54 of 1949, s. 3, for “a mine oil -field”.  
4. Subs. by Act 24 of 1996, s. 2, for “a banking or an insurance company” (w.e.f. 11 -10-1996).  

CHAPTER IIB  
REFERENCE OF CERTAIN  INDIVIDUAL  DISPUTES TO GRIEVANCE  SETTLEMENT  AUTHORITIES  
9C. Setting up of Grievance Settlement Authorities and reference of certain individual disputes to 
such authorities . 
 
CHAPTER III  

anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, 
resignation and removal and other terms and conditions of s ervice of the Presiding Officer of the 
Industrial Tribunal appointed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 7A, shall, after 
the commencement of 3[the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of 
the said Act]: 
Provided that the Presiding Officer appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter 

                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 158 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 4 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. The word “or” omitted by Act 46 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  

21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(7) Subject to any rules made under this Act, the costs of, and incidental to, any proceeding before a 
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be in the d iscretion of that Labour Cour t, Tribunal or 
National Tribunal and the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be, shall have full 
power to determine by and to whom and to what extent and subject to what conditions, if any, such costs 
are to be paid, and to give al l necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid and such costs may, on 

(Central Act No. 14 of 1947), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act, in section 2, - 
(a) the existing sub -clause (iii) of clause (g) shall be deleted; and  
(b) in clause (s), the existing expression “by an employer or by a contractor in relation to the 
execution of his contract with such employer” shall be deleted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 2]  

                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 6 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Subs. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 6, for Chapter IIB (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982 , s. 7 (w.e.f. 21-8-1984).  21 
 (6) The Grievance Redressal Committee may complete its proceedings within thirty days on receipt 
of a written application by or on behalf of the aggrieved party.  

require:  
Provided that in any proceeding under this section the Labour Cour t, Tribunal or National Tribunal, 
as the case may be, shall rely only on the materials on record and shall not take any fresh evide nce in 
relation to the matter.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
 

or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( s) (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 2, for “one thousand six hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
4. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  

(4A) Whoever refuses or fails to attend or take part in a conciliation proceedings or fails or refuses to 
produce the documents in pursuance of an order issued under sub -section ( 4), shall, on conviction, be 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for sub -sections ( 5) to ( 7) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule.  

Karnataka  
Amendment of Central Act XIV of 1947 .—(1) In section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as 
amended by the Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949 (Madras Act XII of 1949),                    
sub-section (2A) shall be omitted.  
(2) Section 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, a s inserted by the Industrial Disputes (Mysore 
Amendment) Act, 1953 (Mysore Act 15 of 1953), shall be omitted.  

Provided further that the registration of a Union shall not be cancelled under the 
provisions of this sub -clause unless its membership at the time of the cancellation is less 
than such minimum; or  
(iii) that the registered Union is being conducted not bona fide in the interests of 
workmen but in the interests of employers to the prejudice of the interests of workmen; or  
(iv) that it has instigated, aided or assisted the commencement or continuance of 

Kerala  
Amendment of Section 7A .—In sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(Central Act 14 of 1947) for clause ( a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“(a) he is, or has been, a judicial officer not below the rank of a District Judge, or is qualified for 
appointment as a Judge of a High Court; or” . 
                                                           

but does not include an auditor;]  
(m) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(n) “public utility service ” means — 
(i) any railway service 7[or any transport service for the carriage of passe ngers or goods by 
air]; 
 8[(ia) any service in, or in connection with the worki ng of, any major port 9[or dock  or any 

9. Clause ( aa) re-lettered as clause ( aaa) by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
10. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
11. Subs. by Act 38 of 1959, s. 64 and the third Schedule, Part II, for clause ( bb). 
12. Ins. by Act 28 of 1981, s. 40 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 4 -1-1982).  
13. Ins. by Act 62 of 1984, s. 71 and the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 20 -3-1985). 7 
 1[2***,] 3[the Small Industries Development Bank of India established under section 3 of the Small  

adjudication and, in the course of the adjudication proceedings, the Labour Court, Tribunal  or National 
Tribunal, as the case may be, is satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified, it may, 
by its award, set aside the order of discharge or dismissal and direct reinstatement of the workman on 
such terms and conditions, if  any, as it thinks fit, or give such other relief to the workman including the 
award of any lesser punishment in lieu of discharge or dismissal as the circums tances of the case may 
require:  

(i) a person shall be deemed to be “independent ” for the p urpose of his appointment as the 
chairman or other member of a Board, Court or Tribunal, if he is unconnected with the industrial 
dispute referred to such Board, Court or Tribunal or with any industry dir ectly affected by such 
dispute:  
12[Provided that no p erson shall cease to be independent by reason only of the fact that he is a 
shareholder of an incorporated company which is connected with, or likely to be affected by, such 

38. Power to make rules . 4 
 SECTIONS  
39. Delegation of powers . 
40. Power to amend Schedules . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. —INDUSTRIES WHICH MAY BE DECLARED TO BE PUBLIC UTILITY 
SERVICES UNDER SUB -CLAUSE ( vi) OF CLAUSE ( n) OF SECTION 2 . 

Tribunal or of a National Tribunal] for decision whether the period of operation should not, by rea son of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 9, for “An arbitration award” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
2. Section 18 re -numbered as sub -section ( 3) of that section by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  
3. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 9 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. Subs. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule, for “an award which is declared by the appropriate Government to be binding 

[Vide Assam Act 22 of 200 7, s. 2]  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 2. —In clause(s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 (14 of 
1947), for the words and comma “operational, clerical or supervisory work”, the words and commas 
“sales promotion, operational, clerical or supervisory work or any work for promotion of sales” shall be 
substituted.  

STATE AMENDMENT  
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Section 25F .—In clause (b), for "fifteen days", substitute "thirty days"  
[Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second 
Order, 2020,  Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated           

years from the date of regis tration of the representative union" shall be inserted; and  
(b) in sub -section (3), for the words "three months immediately preceding the date of the 
application", the words "at least   three months during the period of six months immediately preceding 
the calendar month in which it so applied" shall be substituted . 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 5]  
Amendment of section 9C, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - Section 9C of the principal Act, as inserted by 

Government, is referr ed to a National Tribunal, then notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any 
reference in section 15, section 17, section 19, section 33A, section 33B and section 36A to the 
appropriate Government in relation to such dispute shall be construed as a reference to the Central 
Government but, save as aforesaid and as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, any reference in any 
other provision of this Act to the appropriate Government in relation to that dispute shall mean a 
reference to the State Gover nment.]  

 
Tamil Nadu   
Insertion of new section 11 -B-After section 11 -A of the Industrial Disputes act, 1947 (Central Act XIV 
of 1947), the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
“11-B. Power of Labour Court or Tribunal to execute its award by decree - A Labour Court 
or a Tribunal shall have the power of a civil court to execut e its o wn award as a decree of a civil court 

3. Ins. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule.  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
6. Ins. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 7 (w.e.f 15 -9-2010).  30 
 punishable with imprisonment for a period which may extend to three months or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees or with both.”  

Committee has two members and in case the number of members are more than two, the number o f women 
members may be increased proportionately.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the setting up of Grievance Redressal 
Committee shall not affect the right of the workman to raise industrial dispute on the same matter under 
the pro visions of this Act.  
                                                           

shall be inserted  namely: — 
“(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the section 9C and in this section, in the case of a 
dispute falling within the scope  of section 2A, the individual workman concerned may, within six 
months from the date of communication to him of the order of di scharge, dismissa l, retrenchment or 
termination or the date of commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act , 
1987, whichever is later, apply, in the prescribed manner, to the Labour Court for adjudication of the 

(3) The chairperson of the Grievance Redressal Committee shall be selected from the employer and 
from among the workmen alternatively on rotation basis every year.  
(4) The total number of members o f the Grievance Redressal Committee shall not exceed more than 
six: 
Provided that there shall be, as far as practicable, one woman member if the Grievance Redressal 
Committee has two members and in case the number of members are more than two, the number o f women 

under the Code of civil Procedure, 19 08 (Central Act V of 1908), in respect of the following matters, 
namely: — 
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(ii) compelling the production of documents;  
(iii) issuing commission for examination of witness.  
(4A) Whoever refuses or fails to attend or take part in a conciliation proceedings or fails or refuses to 

33A. Special provision for adjudication as to whether conditions of service, etc., changed during 
pendency of proceedings.  
33B. Power to transfer certain proceedings.  
33C. Recovery of money due from an employer.  
34. Cognizance o f offences . 
35. Protection of persons . 

(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding o fficer of a National Tribunal 
1[unless he is, or has been, a Judge  of a High Court].  
(4) The Central Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint two persons as assessors to advise the 
National Tribunal in the proceeding before it.  
7C. Disqualifications for the presiding officers of Labour Courts, Tr ibunals and National  
Tribunals. —No person shall be appointed to, or continue in, the office of the presiding officer of a 

STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala   
Amendment of section 2 .—In section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 
1947), in clause (s), for  the words “clerical or supervisory work” the words “clerical, supervisory 
work or any work for the promotion of sales” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Kerala Act 12 of 2017, s. 2]  

consultation with their trade union, if any, registered under the Indian Trade  Unions Act, 1926  
(16 of 1926).  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Works Committee to promote measures for securi ng and preserving 
amity and good relations between the employer and workmen and, to that end, to comment upon matters 
of their common interest or concern and endeavour to compose any material difference of opin ion in 
respect of such matters.  

Tribunal, as the case may be, consti tuted by the State Government. ] 
5[(1A) Where the Central Government is of opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is 
apprehended and the dispute involves any question of national importance or is of such a nature that 
industrial establishments situated in more than one State are likely to be interested in, or affected by, such dispute 
and that the dispute should be adjudicated by a National Tribunal, then, the Central Government may, whether or not 
it is the appropriate Government in relation to that dispute, at any time, by order in wri ting, refer the dispute or any 

(f) “Court ” means a Court of Inqu iry constituted under this Act;  
(g) “employer ” means ,— 
(i) in relation to an industry carried on by or under the a uthority of any department of 9[the 
Central Government or a State Government], the authority prescribed in this behalf, or where no 
authority is prescribed, the head of the departmen t; 
(ii) in relation to an industry carried on by or on behalf of a local authority, the chief 

25Q. Penalty for lay -off and re trenchment without previous permission . 
25R. Penalty for closure . 
25S. Certain provisions of Chapter VA to apply to an industrial establishment to which this Chapter 
applies . 
 
CHAPTER VC  

(o) “railway company ” means a railway company as defined in section 3 of the Indian Railways 
Act, 1890 (9  of 1890);  
2[(oo) “retrenchment ” means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any 
reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary  action, but does 
not include — 
(a) voluntary retirement of the wor kman; or  

constitute one or more National Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes which, in 
the opinion of the Central Government, involve questions of national importance or are of such a nature 
that industrial establishments situated in more than one State are likely to be interested in,  or affected  by, 
such disputes.  
(2) A National Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding o fficer of a National Tribunal 

Management established for two or more cont iguous States under section 16 of the Food 
Corporat ions Act, 1964 (37 of 1964), or 1[the Airports Authority of India constituted under 
section 3 of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 (55 of 1994)] , or a Regional Rural Bank 
established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 (21 of 1976), or the Export 
Credit and Guarantee Corporation Limited or the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India 2[the 
National Housing Bank established under sec tion 3 of the National Housing B ank Act, 1987 (53 

 on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the consti tution of, such Board or 
Court.  
(2) No settlement arrived at in the cou rse of a conciliation proceeding shall be invalid by reason only 
of the fact that such settlement was arrived at after the expiry of the period referred to in sub -section ( 6) 
of section 12 or sub -section ( 5) of section 13, as the case may be.  
(3) Where the  report of any settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding before a 

22. Prohibi tion of strikes and lock -outs.—(1) No person employed in a public utility service shall 
go on  strike in breach of contract — 
(a) without giving to the emplo yer notice of strike, as herein after provided, withi n six weeks 
before striking; or  
(b) within fourteen days of giving such notice; or  
(c) before the expiry of the date of strike specified in a ny such notice as aforesaid; or  

otherwise erroneous.  
(3) The Industrial Tribunal in appeal, may confirm, modify or rescind any order passed by the 
Registrar and may pass such co nsequential orders as it may deem fit. A copy of the orders passed by the 
Industrial Tribunal, shall be sent to the Registrar.  17 
 9J. Publication of orders .-Every order passed under section 9E or section 9F or section 9G and 
every order passed in appeal under  section 9I shall be published in the prescribed manner."  

25M. Prohibition of lay -off. 
25N. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen . 
25-O. Procedure for closing down an undertaking . 
25P. Special provision as to restarting of undertakings closed down before commencement of the 
Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1976 . 
25Q. Penalty for lay -off and re trenchment without previous permission . 

15. Duties of La bour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals . 
16. Form of report or award . 
17. Publication of reports and awards . 
17A. Commencement of the award.  
17B. Payment of  full wages to workman pending proceedings in higher courts.  
18. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding . 

 7A. Tribunals .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any 
matter, whether specified in the Second S chedule or the Third Schedule 1[and for performing such other 
functions as may be as signed to them under this Act].  
2[(1A) The Industrial Tribunal constituted by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall also 
exercise, on and from the commencement  of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, the 

9. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  11 
 (i) such allowances (including dearness allowance) as the workman is for the time being 
entitled to;  
(ii) the value of any house accommodation, or of supply of light, water, medical attendance or 
other amenity or of any service or of any concessio nal supply of  foodgrains or other articles;  
(iii) any travelling concession;  

ACT NO. 14 OF 19471  
[11th March , 1947.]  
An Act to make provision for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes, and for 
certain other purposes.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to make provision for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes, 
and for certain other purposes here inafter appearing;  

6[(aa) “arbitrator ” includes an umpire;]  
8[ 9[(aaa)] “average pay ” means the average of t he wages payable to a workman — 
(i) in the case of monthly paid workman, in the three complete calendar months,  
(ii) in the case of weekly paid workm an, in the four complete weeks,  
(iii) in the case of daily paid workman, in the twelve full working days,  
preceding the date on which the average pay becomes payable if the workman had worked for three 

employment s may be specified in the order or as may be determined in accordance with the 
order, including payment of money by the employer to any person who is or has been a workman;  
(b) for requiring any public utility service not to close or remain closed and to work or 
continue to work on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the order, and  
(c) for any incidental or supplementary matter which appears to it to be necessary or 
expedients for the purpose of the order:  

Explanation .—Every workman whose name is borne on the muster rolls of the industrial 
establishment and who presents himself for work at the establishment at the time appointed for the 
purpose during normal working hours on any day and is not given employment by the employer 
within two hours of his so presenting himself shall be deemed to have  been laid -off for that day 
within the meaning of this clause:  
Provided that if the workman, instead of being given employment at the commencement of any 

Explanation :—For the purposes of this sub -clause, “agricultural operation” does not include any activity carried on in a 
plantation as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951); or  
(2) hospita ls or dispensaries; or  
(3) educational, scientific, research or training institutions; or  
(4) institutions owned or managed by organisations wholly or substantially engaged in any charitable, social or 
philanthropic service; or  

illegal lock -out shall not be deem ed to be illegal.  
25. Prohibition of financial aid to i llegal strikes and lock -outs.—No person shall knowingly 
expend or apply any money in direct furtherance of support of any illegal st rike or lock -out. 
3[CHAPTER VA  
LAY-OFF AND RETRENCHMENT  
25A. Appl ication of sections 25C to 25E .—(1) Sections 25C to 25E inclusive 4[shall not apply to 

11A. Powers of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in case of 
discharge or dismissal of workmen . 
12. Duties of conciliation officers . 
13. Duties of Board . 
14. Duties of Courts . 
15. Duties of La bour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals . 

8. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
9. Subs. by Act 25 of 2021, s. 17, for “or dock” (w.e.f. 30 -6-2021).  10 
 (vi) any industry specified in t he 1[First Schedule] which the appropriate Government may, if 
satisfied that public emergency or public interest so requires, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare to be a public utility service for the purposes of this Act, for such period as may 
be specified in the notification:  

Union (hereinafter in this section referred to as "applicant Union" ) makes an application to the Registrar 
for being registered in place of the Union (hereinafter in this section referred to as "representative Union") 
for a unit of an industry on the ground that it has a larger membership of workmen employed in such unit 
of the industry, the Registrar shall call upon the representative Union by a notice in writing to show cause 
within one month of the receipt of such notice why the applicant Union should not be registered in its 
place. An application made under this sub -section shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.  

enforceable on the expiry of thirty d ays from the date of its publication u nder section 17:  
Provided that — 
(a) if the appropriate Government is of opinion, in any case where the award has been given by a 
Labour Court or Tribunal in relation to an industrial dis pute to which it is a party; or  
(b) if the Central Government is of opinion, in any case where the award has bee n given by a 
National Tribunal,  

4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Ins. by s. 7,  ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 5 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
7. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  24 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  

(c) before the expiry of the date of strike specified in a ny such notice as aforesaid; or  
(d) during the pendency of any conciliation proceedings before a conciliation officer and seven 
days after the conclusion of such proceeding s. 
(2) No employer carrying on any public utility service shall lock -out any of his workmen — 
(a) without giving them notice of lock -out as hereinafter provided, within six weeks be fore 
locking out; or  

upon the reference, if the arbitrators are equally divided in their opinion, and the award of the umpire 
shall prevail and shall be deemed to be the arbitration award  for the purposes of this Act.]  
(2) An arbitration agreement referred to i n sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall be signed 
by the parties thereto in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) A copy of the arbitration agreement shall be forwarded to the appropriate Government and the 
conciliation officer and the appropr iate Government shall, within 3[one month] from the date of the 

department including three years of experience as Conciliation Officer:  
Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner shall 
be appointed unless  he resigns from the service of the Central Government or State Government, as the 
case may be, before being appointed as the presiding officer; or  
(c) he is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade III with three years' experience in the grade. ] 
6*    *    *   *    * 

between employers and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the 
employment or non -employment or the terms of e mployment or with the condi tions of labour, of any 
person;  
2[(ka) “industrial establishment or undertaking ” means an establishment or undertaking in wh ich 
any industry is carried on:  
Provided that where several activities are carried on in an establishment  or undertaking and only 

opinion, whether on an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, that the dispute is of such a 
nature that any other establishment, group or clas s of establishments of a similar nature is likely to be 
interested in, or affected by, such dispute, the appropriate Government may, at the time of making the 
reference or at any time thereafter but before the submission of the award, include in that refer ence such 
establishment, group or class of establishments, whether or not at the time of such inclusion any dispute 
exists or is apprehended in that establishment, gro up or class of establishments.]  

Provided that where several activities are carried on in an establishment  or undertaking and only 
one or some of such activities is or are an industry or in dustries, then, — 
(a) if any unit of such establishment or undertaking carrying on any activity, being an 
industry, is severable from the other unit or units of such establishment or undertaking, such unit 
shall be deemed to be a separate industrial establ ishment or undertaking;  
(b) if the predominant activity or each of the predominant activities carried on in such 

Amendment of section 7A .—In clause ( aa) of sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 1947), as inserted by the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka 
Amendment) Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act 6 of 1963), after the words “distr ict Judge” the words “for a 
period of not less than three years”, shall be inserted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 35 of 1963, s. 2]  
Kerala  

(3) The notice of lock -out or strike under this section shall not be necessary where there is already in 
existence a strike or, as the case may be, lock -out in the public utility service, but the employer shall send 
intimation of such lock -out or strike on the day on which it is de clared, to such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government either generally or for a particular area or for a particular cl ass 
of public utility services.  
(4) The notice of strike referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be given by such numbe r of persons to such 

Provided that if the workman, instead of being given employment at the commencement of any 
shift for any day is asked to present himself for the purpose during the second half of the shift for the 
day and is given employment then, he sha ll be deemed to have been laid -off only for one -half of that 
day: 
Provided further that if he is not given any such employment even after so presenting himself, he 
shall not be deemed to have been laid -off for th e second half of the shift for the day and shall be 

Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), after clause ( a), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely: - 
“(aa) he has been a member of the Orissa Superior Judicia l Service for a period of not less than seven 
years.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 1960, s. 2]  
7B. National Tribunals .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more National Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes which, in 

Provided further that it shall be lawful for the employer in any case falling within the foregoing 
proviso to retrench t he workman in accordance with the provisions contained in section 25F at any time 
after the expiry of the first forty -five days of the lay -off and when he does so, any compensation paid to 
the workman for having been laid -off during the preceding twelve mo nths may be set off against the 
compens ation payable for retrenchment.  
Explanation .—”Badli  workman ” means a workman who is employed in an industrial establishment in 

Tribunal considers it necessary or expedient to extend such period, he may for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, extend such period by such furt her period as he may think fit:  
Provided also that in computing an y period specified i n this sub -section, the period, if any, for which 
the proceedings before the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal had been stayed by any injunction 
or order of a  Civil Court shall be excluded:  
                                                           

place. An application made under this sub -section shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Registrar shall forward to the Labour Commissioner of the State Government a copy of the 
said application and notice.  
(3) If, on the expiry of the period of notice under sub -section (1) and after holding such inquiry as he 
deems fit, the Registrar comes to the conclusion that the applicant Union complies with the conditions 
necessary for registration specified in section 9D and that its membership was during the whole of the 

shareholder of an incorporated company which is connected with, or likely to be affected by, such 
industrial dispute; but in such a case, he shall disclose to the appropriate Gover nment the nature and 
extent of the share s held by him in such company;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1964, s. 38 and the Second Schedule, Part II (w.e.f. 1 -7-1964).  
2. The words “the Industrial Development Bank of India” omitted by Act 53 of 2003, s. 12 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 2 -7-2004).  

appropriate Government sha ll appoint such persons as it thin ks fit to represent that party.  
(4) A Board, having the prescribed quorum, may act notwithstanding the absence of the chairman or any of its 
member s or any vacancy in its number:  
Provided that if the appropriate Government  notifies the Board that the services of the chairman or of any other 
member have ceased to be available, the Board shall not act until a new chairman or member, as the c ase may be, 
has been appointed.  

Provided that the appropriate Government may reduce the said period and fi x such period as it thinks 
fit: 
Provided further that the appropriate Government may, before  the expiry of the said period, extend 
the period of operation by any period not exceeding one year at a time as it thinks fit so, however, that the 
total period of operation of any award does not exceed three years from the date o n which it came into 
operation.  

National Housing Bank established under sec tion 3 of the National Housing B ank Act, 1987 (53 
of 1987) ], or 3[4[an air transport service, or a banking or an insurance company ], a mine, an oil -
field] 5[, a Cantonment Board,] or a 6[major po rt, any  company in which not less than fifty -one 
per cent. of the paid -up share capital is held by the Central Government, or any corporation, not 
being a corporation referred to in this clause, established by or under any law made by 
Parliament, or the Central public sector undertaking, subsidiary companies set u p by the principal 

CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Offence by companies, etc.  
33. Conditions of service, etc., to remain unchanged under certain circumstances during pendency of 
proceedings.  
33A. Special provision for adjudication as to whether conditions of service, etc., changed during 

9. Finality of or ders constituting Boards, etc .—(1) No order of the appropriate Government or of 
the Central Government appointing any person as the chairman or any other member of a Board or Court 
or as the presiding officer of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be called in question in 
any manner; and no act or proceeding before any Board or Court shall be called in question in any manner 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982 , s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  

1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982 , s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 158 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 8, for “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), be governed by the provis ions 
of section 184 of that Act” (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 5, for sections 8 and 9 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  20 
 on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the consti tution of, such Board or 

controlled by the State Government, the State Government: Provided that in case of a dispute 
between a contractor and the contract labour employed through the contractor in any industrial 
establis hment where such dispute first arose, the appropriate Government shall be the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, which has control over such industrial 
establishment ;] 
6[(aa) “arbitrator ” includes an umpire;]  

than fourteen days before the expiry of the period of notice under sub -section (1).  
9H. Application for re -registration .-(1) Any Union the registration of which  has been cancelled on 
the ground that it was registered under a mistake or on the ground specified in sub -clause (ii) of clause (a) 
of section 9F may, at any time after three months from the date of such cancellation and on payment of 
such fees as may be prescribed, apply for re -registration. The provisions of sections 9D and 9E shall 
apply in respect of such application.  

4. Conciliation officers . 
5. Board of Conciliation . 
6. Courts of Inquiry . 
7. Labour Courts . 
7A. Tribunals . 
7B. National Tribunals . 

next preceding the date of its so applying under this section a m embership of not less than fifteen per cent. 
of the total number of workmen employed in unit of an industry may apply in the prescribed form to the 
Registrar for registration as a Representative Union.  
9E. Registration of Union .-On receipt of an application from a Union for registration under section 
9D and on payment of the fee prescribed, the Registrar shall, if, after holding such inquiry as he deems fit, 
he comes to the conclusion that the conditions requisite for registrati on specified in the said section are 

employment as may be specified in t he order or as may be determined in accordance with the order, 
including payment of money by the employer to any person who is or has been a workman;  
(b) for requiring any public utility service not to close or remain closed and to work or continue to 
work  on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the order; and  
(c) for any incidental or supplementary matters which appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
the purposes of the order:  

cause for no t raising the dispute within the period of three years.”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 3]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 2, Central Act XIV of 1947 .-In section 2 of the principal Act ;-- 
(i) after clause (aa) the following new clauses shall be inserted, namely - 
" (aaa) "arbitration proceeding" means - 

  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 3.  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7, for “a Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “the Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  

or for the benefit of the workman under any l aw for the time being in force;  
(c) any gratuity payable on t he termination of his service;]  
2[(s) “workman ” means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any 
manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward, 
whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding 
under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, 

he comes to the conclusion that the conditions requisite for registrati on specified in the said section are 
satisfied and that the Union is not otherwise disqualified for registration, enter the name of the Union in 
the appropriate register maintained under section 9C and issue a certificate of registration in such form as 
may be prescribed:  
Provided that - 
(i) where two or more Unions fulfilling the conditions necessary for registration under this 

or a Tribunal shall have the power of a civil court to execut e its o wn award as a decree of a civil court 
and also to execute any settlement as defined in clause (p) of section 2 as a decree.”  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 45 of 2008, s. 2]  
In section 11 -B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for the expression “award” the e xpression 
“award and order” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 2019, s. 2]  

(C) it is necessary in the public interest to do so.  
(2) When the State Government makes a reference to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication of any 
industrial dispute, any submission or any award of an arbitrator with regard to that industrial dispute shall 
stand as cancelled.  
10I. Notice of award to par ties.- (1) The arbitrator or the Industrial Tribunal as an arbitrator, as the 
case may be, shall forward copies of the award made by him or it to the parties, the Commissioner of 

NOTICE OF CHANGE  
9A. Notice of change .—No employer, who proposes to effect any change in the conditions of service 
applicable to any workman in respect of any matter specified in the Fourth Schedu le, shall effect such 
change, — 
(a) without giving to the workmen likely to be affected by such change a notice in the prescribed 
manner of the nature of the cha nge proposed to be effected; or  

exercise, on and from the commencement  of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the Tribunal referred to in section 7D of the Employees' 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952).]  
(2) A Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appointed  by the appropriate Government.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding  officer of a Tribunal unless — 
(a) he is, or has be en, a Judge of a High Court; or  

CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
26. Penalty for illegal strikes and lock -outs. 
27. Penalty for instigation, etc . 
28. Penalty for giving financial aid to illegal strikes and lock -outs. 
29. Penalty for breach of settlement or award . 

(i) any section of an industrial establishment on the working of which the safety of the 
establishment or the workman employed therein depends;  
(ii) any ind ustry which supplies power, light or water to the public;  
(iii) any industry which has been declared by the State Government to be a public utility service 
for the purpose of this Act.  
(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to operate on the e xpiry of a period of six months 

" (aaa) "arbitration proceeding" means - 
(i) any proceeding under Chapter III -A of this Act before an arbitrator, or  
(ii) any proceeding before an Industrial Tribunal in arbitration;  
(aaaa) "arbitrator" means an arbitrator to whom a dispute is referred for arbitration 
under the provisions of Chapter III -A of this Act and includes an umpire;"  
(ii) in clause (b), for the words, figures and letter "under section 10A", the words, 

it is necessary or expedient so to do for securing the public safety or convenience or the maintenance 
of public order or supplies and services essential to th e life of the community or for maintain 
employment or industrial peace in the establishment concerning which such reference has been made, 
it may, by general or special order, make provision, — 
(a) for requiring the employer or workman or both to observe su ch terms and conditions of 
employment s may be specified in the order or as may be determined in accordance with the 

SERVICES UNDER SUB -CLAUSE ( vi) OF CLAUSE ( n) OF SECTION 2 . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. —MATTERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF LABOUR  COURTS . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. —MATT ERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF INDUSTRIAL  TRIBUNALS . 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. —CONDITIONS OF SERVICE FOR CHANGE OF WHICH NOTICE IS TO BE 
GIVEN . 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. —UNFAIR  LABOUR  PRACTICES . 

Insertion of new section 10B. —After section 10A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted namely: — 
“10B. Power to issue order regarding terms and conditions of service pending settlement of 
disputes .—(1) Where an industrial dispute has been referred by the State Government to a Labour 
Court  or a Tribunal under Sub -section ( 1) of section 10 and if in the opinion of the State Government 
it is necessary or expedient so to do for securing the public safety or convenience or the maintenance 

has been appointed.  
6. Courts of Inquiry .—(1) The appropriate Government m ay as occasion arises by notification in the Official 
Gazette constitute a Court of Inquiry for inquiring into any matter appearing to be connected with or relevan t to an 
industrial dispute.  
(2) A Court may consist of one independent person or of such numb er of independent persons as the appropriate 
Government may think fit and where a Court consists of two or more members, one of them shal l be appointed as 

(e) “conciliation proceeding ” means any proceeding held by a conciliation o fficer or Board under 
this Act;  
7[(ee) “controlled industry ” means any industry the control of which by the Union has been 
declared by any Central Act to be exp edient in the public interest;]  
8*    *   *    *    * 
(f) “Court ” means a Court of Inqu iry constituted under this Act;  

be available, the Court shall not act until a new chairman has b een appointed.  
1[7. Labour Courts .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
one or more Labour Courts for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any matter specified in the Second 
Schedule and for performing such ot her functions as may be a ssigned to them under this Act.  
(2) A Labour Court shall consist of one person only to be appointed by the appropriate Government.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding of ficer of a Labour Court, unle ss— 

2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute . 
 
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES UNDER THIS ACT 
3. Works Committee . 
4. Conciliation officers . 

18. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding . 
19. Period of operation of settlements and awards . 
20. Commencement and conclusion of proceedings . 
21. Certain matters to be kept confidential . 
 
CHAPTER V  

substituted.  
[Vide Orissa  Act 5 of 2014 , s. 2]  
4[2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deeme d to be an industrial dispute .—5[(1)] 
Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches, or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected with, 
or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 

3. Omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
4. Certain words omitted by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
5. The words “by the Federal Railway Authority” omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
6. Ins. by Act 65 of 1951, s. 32.  
7. The words “operating a Federal Railway” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
8. Ins. by Act 47 of 1961, s. 51 and the Second Schedule, Part III (w.e.f. 1 -1-1962).  

10G. Dispute to be referred to Industrial Tribunal if no arbitrator appointed .-Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Chapter, if no provision has been made in any submission for the appointment 
of an arbitrator or where by re ason of any circumstances no arbitrator is appointed, such dispute may be 
referred by the State Government for adjudication by the Industrial Tribunal.  
10H. State Government may refer industrial dispute to Industrial Tribunal for adjudication .- 
(1) Notwith standing anything contained in this Chapter the State Government may, at any time, refer an 

locking out; or  
(b) within fourteen  days of giving such notice; or  
(c) before the expiry the date of lock -out specified in a ny such notice as aforesaid; or  
(d) during the pendency of any conciliation proceedings before a conciliation officer and seven 
days after the conclusion of such  proceedings.  
(3) The notice of lock -out or strike under this section shall not be necessary where there is already in 

6*    *    *   *    * 
(4) The appropriate Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint two persons as assessors to advise the 
Tribun al in the proceeding before it.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 7A .—In sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 

a lock -out— 
(a) during the pendency of conciliation proceedings before a Board and seven days after the 
conclusion of such proceedings;  
(b) during the p endency of proceedings before 1[a Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] 
and two months after the c onclusion of such proceedings; 2***  
3[(bb) during the pendency of arbitration proceedings before an arbitrator and two months after 

Act 34 of 1958), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in 
section 9D, for the words "three mo nths next preceding the date of its so applying", the words "at least 
three months during the period of six months immediately preceding the calendar month in which it so 
applies" shall be substituted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 9E, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In section 9E of the principal Act, the existing 

(iii) any travelling concession;  
1[(iv) any commission payable on the promotion  of sales or business or both;]  
but does not include — 
(a) any bonus;  
(b) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund 
or for the benefit of the workman under any l aw for the time being in force;  

8[(ra) “unfair labour practice ” means any of the practices s pecified in the Fifth Schedule;  
(rb) “village industries ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Khadi and 
Village Industries Commission Act, 1956 (61 of 19 56);]  
9[(rr) “wages ” means all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of money, which 
would, if the terms of employment, expressed or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a workman in 
respect of his employment or of work done in such employme nt, and i ncludes — 

1[17B. Payment of full wages to workman pendin g proceedings in higher courts .—Where in any 
case, a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal by its award directs r einstatement of any workman 
and the employer prefers any proceedings against such award in a High Court or the Supreme Court, the 
employer shall be liable to pay such workman, during the period of pendency of such proceedings in the 
High Court or the Supre me Court, full wages last drawn by him, inclusive of any maintenance allowance 
admissible to him under any rule if the workman had not been employed in any establishment during such 

5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
7. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  23 
 Provided also that no proceedings before a Labour Court,  Tribunal or National Tribunal shall lapse 
merely on the ground that any period specified under this sub -section had expired without suc h 
proceedings being completed.]  

(1) Notwith standing anything contained in this Chapter the State Government may, at any time, refer an 
industrial dispute for adjudication by the Industrial Tribunal, if on a report made by the Conciliation . 
Officer or otherwise it is satisfied that - 
(A) by reason o f the continuance of the dispute - 
(a) a serious outbreak of disorder or a breach of the public peace is likely to occur; or  28 
 (b) serious or prolonged hardship to a large section of the community is likely to be 

“(4) A Consiliation  Officer may, if he considers that any document or the testimony of any person 
is relevant or necessary for the settlement or an industrial dispute or for the purpose of verifying the 
implementation of any award or carrying out any other duty imposed on hi m under this Act, call for 
and inspect such document or summon and examine such person. For the aforesaid purposes, the 
Conciliation Officer shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court while trying a suit 
under the Code of civil Procedure, 19 08 (Central Act V of 1908), in respect of the following matters, 

the period aforesaid, until the expiry of two months from t he date on which a notice in writing of an 
intention to terminate the settlement is given by one of the parties to the other part y or parties to the 
settlement.  
10[(3) An award shall, subject to the provisions of this section, remain in operation for  a peri od of one 
year 11[from the date on which the award becomes enforceable under section 17A]:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may reduce the said period and fi x such period as it thinks 

4. Subs. by Act 24 of 1996, s. 2, for “a banking or an insurance company” (w.e.f. 11 -10-1996).  
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
6. Subs. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 2, for “major port, the Central Government, and” (w.e.f  15 -9-2010).  
7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
8. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
9. Clause ( aa) re-lettered as clause ( aaa) by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  

[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 4]  
Amendment of section 9G, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In section 9G of the principal Act - 
(a) in sub -section (1) — 
(i) the words "at any time", occurring after the word "If" shall be deleted; and  
(ii) after the words "for a unit of an industry", the words "at any time after a lapse of two 
years from the date of regis tration of the representative union" shall be inserted; and  

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a disclosure of any such information for 
the purposes of a prosecution under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 36 of 1956,  s. 14, for “the Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. The words “subject to the provision for appeal omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  

operation on such date as is agreed upon by the parties to the  dispute, and if no date is agreed upon, on the 
date on which the memorandum of the settlement is signed  by the parties to the dispute.  
(2) Such settlement shall be binding for such period as is agreed upon by the parties, and if no such 
period is agreed upon, for a period of six months 9[from the date on which the memorandum of settlement 
is signed by the parties to the dispute], and shall continue to be binding on the parties after the expiry of 
the period aforesaid, until the expiry of two months from t he date on which a notice in writing of an 

expression “thirty per cent”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 6]  22 
  
 
CHAPTER III  
REFERENCE OF DISPUTES TO BOARDS, COURTS OR TRIBUNALS  

[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 3]  
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES UNDER THIS ACT 
3. Works Committee .—(1) In the case of any industrial establishment in which one hundred or more 
workmen  are employed or have been employed on any day in the preceding twelve months, the 
appropriate Government may by general or special order require the employer to constitute in the 

National Tribunal shall follow such procedure as the arbitrator or other auth ority concerned may think 
fit.] 
(2) A conciliation of ficer or a member of a Board, 2[or Court or the presiding officer of a Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] may for the purpose of inquiry into any existing or apprehended 
industrial dispute, after giving reasonable notice, enter the premises occupied by any establishmen t to 
which the dispute relates.  

(b) for a period of six months, if the workman, during a period of six calendar months 
preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under 
the employer for not less than — 
(i) ninety -five days, in the case of a workman employed below ground in a mine; and  
(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other case.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( 2), the number of days on which a workman has 

 8[(ia) any service in, or in connection with the worki ng of, any major port 9[or dock  or any 
industrial establishment or unit engaged in essential defence services] ;] 
(ii) any section of an industrial establishment, on the working of which the safety of the 
establishment or the wo rkmen employed therein depends;  
(iii) any postal, telegraph or telephone service;  
(iv) any industry which supplies power , light or water to the public;  

2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
3. Ins. by Act 54 of 1949, s. 3.  9 
 1[(kka) “khadi ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Khadi and Village 
Industries Comm ission Act, 1956 (61 of 1956);]  
2[3[(kkb)] “Labour Court ” means  a Labour Cour t constituted under section 7 ;] 
4[(kkk) “lay-off” (with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions) means the failure, 

(46 of 1982) will come into force: — 
(j) “industry” means any systematic activity carried on by co -operation between an employer a nd his workmen 
(whether such workmen are employed by such employer directly or by or through any agency, including a contractor) for 
the production, supply or distribution of goods or services with a view to satisfy human wants or wishes (not being wants o r 
wishes which are merely spiritual or religious in nature), whether or not, — 
(i) any capital has been invested for the purpose of carrying on such activity; or  

Registrar of Unions for any local area and may, by general or special order, confer on such person all 
or any of the powers of the Registrar of Unions under this Act."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 4]  
Insertion of new Chapter II -B in Central Act XIV of 1947. - After section 9B of the principal Act, 
the following new Chapter shall be inserted, namely: - 
"CHAPTER II -B 

(iv) any industry which supplies power , light or water to the public;  
(v) any system of pu blic conservancy or sanitation;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Clause ( kka) re-lettered as clause ( kkb) by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-8-1984).  

(b) all other parties summoned to appear in the proceedings as parties to t he dispute, unless the 
Board, 6[arbitrator,] 7[Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal], as the case may be, records the 
opinion that they were so  summoned without proper cause;  
(c) where a party referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) is an employer, his heirs, successors or 
assigns in respect of the es tablishmen t to which the dispute relates;  
(d) where a party referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) is composed of workmen, all persons who 

conciliation officer shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Subs. by  Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for “Court or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “and Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  

(8) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the workmen for whom there is an established 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism in the establishment .] 
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 9D, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In the Indus trial Disputes Act, 1947  (Central 
Act 14 of 1947), as amended by the Indus trial Disputes (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 1958 (Rajasthan 
Act 34 of 1958), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in 

(4) The notice of strike referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be given by such numbe r of persons to such 
person or persons and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The notice of lock -out referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be given in su ch manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(6) If on any day an employer receives from any persons employed b y him any such notices as are 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) or gives to any persons employed by him any such notices as are referred to 

the period of ninety days referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Subject to the provisions of su b-section ( 1) and sub -section ( 3) regarding the enforceability of an 
award, the award shall come into operation with effect from such date as may be specified therein, but 
where no date is so specified, it shall  come into operation on the date when the award becomes 
enforceable under sub -section ( 1) or sub - section ( 3), as the case may be.]  
1[17B. Payment of full wages to workman pendin g proceedings in higher courts .—Where in any 

normal wor king hours at least once a day;  
(iii) if such laying -off is due to a strike or slowing -down of production on the part of workmen in 
another part of the establishment.  
25F. Conditions precede nt to retrenchment of workmen .—No workman employed in any industry 
who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retr enched by 
that employer until — 

may be.  
(2) A conciliation proceeding shal l be deemed to have concluded — 
(a) where a settlement is arrived at, when a memorandum of the settlement is signed  by the 
parties to the dispute;  
(b) where no settlement is arrived at, when the report of the conciliation officer is received by the 
appropriate Government or when the report of the Board is published under section 17, as the case 

Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( 2), the number of days on which a workman has 
actually worked under an employer sh all include the days on which — 
(i) he has been laid -off under an agreement or as permitted by standing orders made under the 
Industrial Employment (Standi ng Orders) Act, 1946 (20 of 1946), or under this Act or under any 
other law applicable t o the industrial establishment;  
(ii) he has been on leave with full wages , earned in the previous years;  

years from the date of its registration" shall be inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 4]  
Amendment of Chapter II -B, Central Act No.14 of 1947. - Chapter II -B of the pri ncipal Act, as 
inserted by the Rajasthan Act No. 34 of 1958, shall be renumbered as  
“CHAPTER IIC ”. 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 4]  

7. Subs. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 4, for certain words.  
8. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 16, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
9. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “Court or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  35 
 CHAPTER V  
STRIKES AND LOCK -OUTS  
22. Prohibi tion of strikes and lock -outs.—(1) No person employed in a public utility service shall 

course of conciliation proceeding where such a greement has been signed by the parties thereto in such 
manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to 5[an officer authorised in this behalf 
by] the appropriate Government  and the conciliation officer;]  
(q) “strike ” means a cessation of w ork by a body of persons employed in any industry ac ting in 
combination or a concern ed refusal, or a refusal under a common understanding, of any number of 
persons who are or have been so employed to continue t o work or to accept employment;  

appropriate Government may by general or special order require the employer to constitute in the 
prescribed manner a Works Committee consisting of representatives of employe rs and workmen engaged 
in the establishment so however that the number of representatives of workmen on the Committee shall 
not be less than t he number of representatives of the employer. The representatives of the workmen shall 
be chosen in the prescribed  manner from among the workmen engaged in the establishment and in 
consultation with their trade union, if any, registered under the Indian Trade  Unions Act, 1926  

which the dispute relates.  
(3) Every Board, Court, 3[Labour  Court, Tribunal and National Tribunal] shall have the same powers 
as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit, in 
respect of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him o n oath;  
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects;  

4. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
5. Section 2A numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 24 of 2010, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  12 
 industrial  dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of work men is a party to the 
dispute.]  
1[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section l0, any such workman as is specified in                     
sub-section ( 1) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication of the 

namely: -- 
“(aa) in respect of extensive and indiscriminate armed violence by members of any 
association declared as unlawful association under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 1967, no period commencing from a date earlier than  the date of publication of the 
notification, if any, under section 3 of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 (28 of 
1958) in respect of that area or earlier than two years before the date of publication of the 

every order passed in appeal under  section 9I shall be published in the prescribed manner."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 5]  
4. Conciliation officers .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such number of persons as it thinks fit, to be conciliation officers, charged with the duty of mediating in and 
promoting the set tlement of industrial disputes.  
(2) A conciliation officer may be appointed for a specified area or for specified industries in a specified area or 

of the Registrar as may  be conferred and imposed on him, an Assistant Registrar of 
Unions;  
(oooo) "Representative Union" means a Union for the time being registered as a 
Representative Union under this Act;";  
(vi) after clause (rr), the following new clause shall be inserted, na mely - 
"(rrr) "Union" means a Trade Union of employees registered under the Indian 

 (b) serious or prolonged hardship to a large section of the community is likely to be 
caused; or  
(c) the industry concerned is likel y to be seriously affected or the prospects and scope for 
employment therein curtailed; or,  
(B) the dispute is not likely to be settled by other means; or  
(C) it is necessary in the public interest to do so.  

question relating thereto b y any Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Industrial Tribunal and 
includes an arbitration  award made under section 10A;]  
11[(bb) “banking company ” means a banking company as defined in section 5 of the Banking 
Companies Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), hav ing branches or other establishments in more  than one State, 
and includes 12[the Export -Import Bank of India ,] 13[the Industrial Re construction Bank of India,] 
                                                           

National Tribunal,  
that it will be inexpedient on public grounds affecting national economy or social justice to give effect to 
the whole or any part of the award,  the appropriate Government, or as the case may be, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the award shall not become 
enforceable on the expiry of the said period of thirty days.  
(2) Where any declaration has been  made in relation to an award under the proviso to sub -section ( 1), 

admissible to him under any rule if the workman had not been employed in any establishment during such 
period and an affidavit by such workman had been file d to that effect in s uch Court:  
Provided that where it is proved to the satisfaction of the High Court or the Supreme Court that such 
workman had been employed and had been receiving adequate remuneration during any such period or 
part thereof, the Court shall order that no wa ges shall be payable under this section for such period or 
part, as the case may be.]  

Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated           
(23-10-2020).  
Meghalaya  
Amendment of section 2 (s) of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act No. 14 of 1947). —For 
the existing clause (s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes act, 1947 (Central Act No. 14 of 1947) the 

Tribunal, by a written agreement, refer the dispute to arbitration and the reference shall be to such person 
or persons (including the presiding officer of a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal) as an 
arbitrat or or arbitrators as may be specifie d in the arbitration agreement.  
2[(1A) Where an arbitration agreement provides for a reference of the dispute to an even number of 
arbitrators, the agreement shall provide for the appointment of another person as umpire who shall enter 
upon the reference, if the arbitrators are equally divided in their opinion, and the award of the umpire 

 Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporati on established under section 3 of the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961), or the Central Warehousing 
Corporation established under section 3 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 (58 of 1962), 
or the Unit Trust of  India established under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963  
(52 of 1963), or the Food Corporation of Ind ia established under section 3 or a Board of 
Management established for two or more cont iguous States under section 16 of the Food 

fallen below the minimum required under section 9D for its registration:  16 
 Provided that where a strike or a closure not being an illegal strike or closure 
under this Act in a unit of industry involving more than one -third of the workmen in the 
unit of the industry has extended to a period exceeding fourteen days in any calendar 
month, such month shall be excluded in computing the sa id period of three months:  
Provided further that the registration of a Union shall not be cancelled under the 

4[(e)] he has been the presiding officer of a Labour Court constituted under any Provincial Act or State Ac t 
for not less than five years.  
5[(f) he is or has been a Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) or Joint Commissioner of th e State 
Labour Department, having a degree in law and at least seven years' experience in the labour department 
including three years of experience as Conciliation Officer:  
Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner  shall be appointed 

(b)  in sub -section (2) — 
(i) In clause (a) of the proviso, t he word “and” appearing at the end shall be deleted, and the 
words, letters and brackets, “save in respect of the cases referred to in clause (aa)”, shall be 
inserted in the beginning, and  15 
 (ii) below clause (a) of the pr oviso so amended, the following cla use shall be added, 
namely: -- 

25A. Appl ication of sections 25C to 25E .—(1) Sections 25C to 25E inclusive 4[shall not apply to 
industrial establishments to wh ich Chapter VB applies, or —] 
(a) to industrial establishments in which less than fifty workmen on an average per working day 
have been employed in t he preceding calendar month; or  
(b) to industrial establishments which are of a seasonal  character or in which work is  performed 
only intermittently.  

1[25C. Right of work men laid -off for compensation .—Whenever a workman (other than a badli  
workman or a casual workman) whose name is borne on the muster rolls of an industrial establishment 
and who has completed not less than one year of continuous service under an employer is laid -off, 
wheth er continuously or intermittently, he shall be paid by the employer for all days during which he is so 
laid-off, except for such weekly holidays as may intervene, compensation which shall be equal to fifty per 
cent. of the total of the basic wages and dear ness allowance that would have been payable to h im had he 

Officer that he had sufficient cause for not raising the di spute within the period of three years. ”. 
[Vide Andhra Pradesh 12 of 2015, s . 2] 
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Section 2A .—In sub -section (3), for "three years", substitute "one year".  
[Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second 
Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 

under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, 
discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that disp ute, or whose dismissal, 
discha rge or retrenchment has led  to that dispute, but doe s not include any such person — 
(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Army Act, 1950  
(46 of 1950), or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957); or  
(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or o ther employee of a prison; or  

under sub -section ( 3A), the appropriate Government may, by order, prohibit the continuance of any strike 
or lock -out in connection with such dispute which may be in existence  on the date of the reference.]  
(5) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 194 0), shall apply to arbitrat ion under this section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Insertion of new section 10B. —After section 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 

preceding the date on which the average pay becomes payable if the workman had worked for three 
complete calendar months or four complete weeks or twelve full working days, as the case may be, and 
where such calculation can not be made, the average pay shall be calculated as the average of the wages 
payable to a workman during the period he actually worked;]  
10[(b) “award ” means an interim or a final determination of any industrial dispute or of any 
question relating thereto b y any Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Industrial Tribunal and 

2[(3)] A settlement arrived at in the course of conciliati on proceedings under this Act 3[or an 
arbitration award in a case where a notification has been issued under sub -section ( 3A) of section 10A] or 
4[an award 5[of a Labour Court, Tribuna l or National Tribunal] which has become enf orceable] shall be 
binding on — 
(a) all par ties to the industrial dispute;  
(b) all other parties summoned to appear in the proceedings as parties to t he dispute, unless the 

(i) any section of an industrial establishment on the working of which the safety of the 
establishment or the workmen employed therein depends;  
(ii) any industry which supplies power, light or water to the public;  
(iii) any industry which has been declared by the State Government to be a public utility 
service for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to operate on the expiry of a period of six months 

entitled under the provisions of any award passed by the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 
be."]  
[Vide Kerala Act 30 of 1979, s. 2  ] 
  26 
 Karnataka  
Insertion of new section 10B. —After section 10A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 

vexatiously given or that it would be i nexpedient so to do, make a reference under this  
sub-section notwithstanding that any other proc eedings under this Act in respect of the dispute may have 
commenced:  
4[Provided also that where the dispute in relation to which the Central Government is the appropriate 
Government, it shall be competent for that Government to refer the dispute to a Labour Court or an Industrial 
Tribunal, as the case may be, consti tuted by the State Government. ] 

STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra  Pradesh  
In Section 2A, After the existing sub -section (2), t he following sub -section shall be added, namely: — 
“(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), no such dispute or difference between 
that workman and his employer connected with or arising out of, such  discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute if such dispute is not raised in 

(46 of 1948), or the Central Board of Trustees and the State Boards of Trustees constituted under 
section 5A and section 5B, respectively, of the Employees ’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), 13***, or the Life Insurance Corporatio n of India established 
under section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956), or 14[the Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited registered  under the Companies  Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) ], or the 
                                                           

2[or an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government] togethe r with a memorandum of 
the settlement signed by the parties to the dispute.  
(4) If no such settlement is arrived at, the conciliation officer shall, as soon as practicable after the 
close of the investigation, send to the appropriate Government a full report setting forth the steps taken by 
him for ascertaining the facts and circumstances relating to the dispute and for bringing about a settlement 
thereof, together with a full statement of such facts and circumstances, and the reasons on account of 

(b) any activity relating to the promotion of sales or business or both carried on by an establishment, but does 
not include — 
(1) any agricultural operation except where such agricultural operation is carried on in an integrated manner with any 
other activity (being any such activity as is referred to in the foregoing provisions of this clause) and such other activity  is 
the predominant one.  
Explanation :—For the purposes of this sub -clause, “agricultural operation” does not include any activity carried on in a 

that employer until — 
(a) the workman has been given one month ’s noti ce in writing indicating the reasons for 
retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such 
notice, wage s for the period of the no tice; 
1*    *    *    *   * 
(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenc hment, compensation which shall be 

[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 2019, s. 2]  
12. Du ties of conciliation officers .—(1) Where any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, the 
conciliation officer may, or where the dispute relates to a public utility service and a notice under section 
22 has been given, shall hold conciliation procee dings in the prescribed manner.  
(2) The conciliation officer shall, for the purpose of bringing about a settlement of the dispute, 
without delay, investigate the di spute and all matters affecting the merits and the right settlement thereof 

 1[2***,] 3[the Small Industries Development Bank of India established under section 3 of the Small  
Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989 (39 of 1989),] the Reserve Bank of I ndia, the State 
Bank of India 4[, a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Underta kings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) 5[, a corresponding new bank 
constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1980 (40 of 1980), and any subsidiary bank]] as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 

necessary for registration specified in section 9D and that its membership was during the whole of the 
period of thr ee months immediately preceding the date of the application under this section larger than the 
membership of the representative Union, he shall, subject to the provisions of section 9D, register the 
applicant Union in place of the representative Union.  
(4) Every application made under this section shall be published in the prescribed manner not less 
than fourteen days before the expiry of the period of notice under sub -section (1).  

(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to operate on the e xpiry of a period of six months 
from the date of the order or on the date of the award of the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 
be, whichever is earlier.  
(3) Any money paid by an employer to any person in pursuance of an order under sub -section  (1), 
may be deducted by that employer from out of any monetary benefit to which such person becomes 
entitled under the provisions of any award passed by the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 

order or settlement as if it were a decree passed by it.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 11 .—For sub -section ( 4) of section 11 of the principal Act, the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(4) A Consiliation  Officer may, if he considers that any document or the testimony of any person 

Tribunal] under this section or in a subsequent order, the appropriate Government has specified the points  
of dispute for adjudication, 3[the Labour  Court or the Tribunal or the National Tribunal, as the case may 
be], shall confine its adjudication to those points and matters incidental thereto.  
(5) Where a dispute concerning any establishment or establishments has bee n, or is to be, referred to a 
4[Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] under this section and the appropriate Government is of 
opinion, whether on an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, that the dispute is of such a 

Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner  shall be appointed 
unless he resigns from the service ofthe Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, before being 
appointed as the presiding officer; or  
(g) he is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade Ili with three years' experie nce in the grade.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 4, for section 7 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).   

part, as the case may be.]  
18. Persons on whom sett lements and awards are binding .—2[(1) A settlement arrived at by 
agreement between the employer and workman otherwise than in the course of conci liation proceeding 
shall be binding o n the parties to the agreement.  
  
                                                           

agreement, agree to submit any present or future industrial dispute or class of such disputes to the 
arbitration of any person  whether such arbitrator is named in such agreement or not. Such agreement shall 
be called a submission.  
(2) A copy of every such submission shall be sent to the Registrar who shall register it in the register 
to be maintained for the purpose and shall pub lish it in such manner as may be prescribed.  
10C. Submission when revocable .-Every submission shall in the absence of any provision to the 

4. Subs. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule, for “an award which is declared by the appropriate Government to be binding 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 15”.  
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 9 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
7. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
8. The words “arrived at in the course of a conciliation proceeding under this Act” omitted by  Act 36 of 1956,  s. 14                

appeal  against such order to the Industrial Tribunal:  
Provided that the Industrial Tribunal may, for sufficient reason, admit any appeal made after the 
expiry of such period.  
(2) The Industrial Tribunal may admit an appeal under sub -section (1) if on a perusal of the 
memorandum of appeal and the decision appealed against it finds that the decision is contrary to law or 
otherwise erroneous.  

1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 4, for section 7 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).   
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
3. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 46 of 1982, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
4. Clauses ( a) and ( b) re-lettered as ( d) and ( e) respectively by Act 36 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
5. Ins. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  18 
 7A. Tribunals .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 

REFERENCE OF DISPUTES TO BOARDS, COURTS OR TRIBUNALS  
10. Reference of disputes t o Boards, Courts or Tribunals .—(1) 1[Where the appropriate Government is 
of opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, it may at an y time], by order in writing, — 
(a) refer the dispute to a Board for pro moting a settlement thereof; or  
(b) refer any matter appearing to be connected with or relevant to the dispute to a Court for inquiry; or  
2[(c) refer the dispute or any matter appearing  to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, if it 

Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 5 of 1988, s. 2]  
1[10A. Voluntary re ferenc e of disputes to arbitration .—(1) Where any industrial dispute exists or 
is apprehended and the employer and the workmen agree to refer the dispute to arbitration, they may, at 
any time before the dispute has been referred under section 10 to a Labour Court or Tribunal or National 
Tribunal, by a written agreement, refer the dispute to arbitration and the reference shall be to such person 

following new section shall be inserted, namely: - 
"10K. State Government may lay down terms and conditions of employment and 
prohibit strikes, etc. - (1) Notwithstanding any thing contained in the Act, if in the opinion of the 
State Government, it is necessary or expedient so to do, for securing the public safety or 
convenience or the maintenance of public order or supplies and services essential to th e life of the 
community or for maintaining employment or maintaining industrial peace, it may by a general or 

9C. Setting up of Grievance Redressal Machinery. —(1) Every industrial establishment 
employing twenty or more workmen shall have one or more Grievance Redressal Committee for the 
resolution of disputes arising out of individual grievances.  
(2) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of equal number of members from the 
employer and the workmen.  
(3) The chairperson of the Grievance Redressal Committee shall be selected from the employer and 

3. Clause ( kka) re-lettered as clause ( kkb) by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-8-1984).  
4. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2, for “or for any other reason” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
7. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
8. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  

12. Ins. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 2.  8 
 1[(j) “industry ” means any business, trade, undertaking, manufacture or calling  of employers and 
includes any calling, service, employment, handicraft, or industrial occupation  or avocation of 
workmen;  
(k) “industrial dispute ” means any dispute or difference between  employers and employers, or 
between employers and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the 

(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding of ficer of a Labour Court, unle ss— 
2[(a) he is, or has be en, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) he has, for a period of not less than three years, been a District Judge or an Additional District Judge; or  
3*    *    *   *    *  
4[(d)] he has held any judicial office in India fo r not less than seven years; or  
4[(e)] he has been the presiding officer of a Labour Court constituted under any Provincial Act or State Ac t 

25FF. Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings . 
25FFA. Sixty days’ notice to be given of intention to close down any undertaking . 
25FFF. Compensation to workmen in case of closing down of undertakings . 
25G. Procedure for retrenchment . 
25H. Re -employment of retrenched workmen . 
25-I. [Repealed .] 

Act, 1980 (40 of 1980), and any subsidiary bank]] as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959);]  
(c) “Board ” means a Board of Conciliat ion constituted under this Act;  
6[(cc) “closure ” means the permanent closing down of a place of employment or part thereof;]  
(d) “conciliation officer ” means a conciliation of ficer appoint ed under this Act;  
(e) “conciliation proceeding ” means any proceeding held by a conciliation o fficer or Board under 

shall be deemed to be an industrial  establishment or undertaking;]  
3[(kk) “insurance company ” means an insurance company as defined in section 2 of the Insurance 
Act, 1938  (4 of 1938), having branches or other establish ments in more than one State;]  
                                                           
1. Clause ( j) shall stand substituted as follows when clause ( c) of section 2 of the Industrial  Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982  
(46 of 1982) will come into force: — 

and Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, Civil Services 
(Temporary Service) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil Service Regulations, Civilians in Defence 
Services (Classification, Control and Appea l) Rules or the Indian Railway Establishment Code or any 
other rules or regulations that may be notified in this behalf by the appropriate Government in the 
Official Gazette, apply.  
9B. Power of Government to exempt .—Where the appropriate Government is of  opinion that the 

(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Army Act 1950 (46 of 1950), or 
the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957); or  
(ii) Who is employed in the police service o r as an Officer or other employee of a person; or  
(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or  
(iv) Who being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding one thousand six 
hundred rupees per mensem  or exercises,  either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or 

bound by the award.  
(6) Notwithstanding the expiry of the period of operation under su b-section ( 3), the award shall 
continue to be binding on the parties until a period of two months has elapsed from the date on which 
notice is given by any party bound by the award to the other party or parties intimating its in tention to 
terminate the awa rd. 
3[(7) No notice given under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 6) shall have effect, unless it is given by a 

and for certain other purposes here inafter appearing;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short t itle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947.  

Provided that no person shall at an y time be deemed to be a member if his 
subscription is in arrears for a period of three months or more next preceding such time;";  14 
 (iv) in clause (g), after sub -clause (ii), the following sub -clause shall be inserted, namely - 
" (iii) where the owner of any  industry in the course of or for the purpose of conducting 
the industry contracts with any person for the execution by or under the contractor of the 
whole or any part of any work which is ordinarily a part of the industry, the owner of the 

the following new Chapter shall be inserted, namely: - 
"CHAPTER III -A. 
Arbitration.  
10B. Submission .-(1) Any employer and a Representative Union or, in the absence of any registered 
Representative Union, any other Union which is representative of employees may, by a written 
agreement, agree to submit any present or future industrial dispute or class of such disputes to the 

operation.  
(4) Where the appropriate Government, whether of its own motion or on the application of any party 
bound by the award, considers that since the award was made, there has been a material change in the 
circumstances on which it was based, the appropri ate Government may re fer the award or a part of it 12[to 
a Labour Court, if the award was that of a Labour Court or to a Tribunal, if the award was that of a 
Tribunal or of a National Tribunal] for decision whether the period of operation should not, by rea son of 

6. Subs. by Act 46 of 19 82, s. 10, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  32 
 (2) The award of a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be in wr iting and shall be 
signed by its presiding officer.  
17. Publ ication of reports and awards .—(1) Every report of a Board or Court together with any 
minute of dissent recorded therewith, every arbitration award and every award of a Labour  Court, 
Tribunal or National Tribunal shall, within a period of thirty days from the date of its receipt by the 

without delay, investigate the di spute and all matters affecting the merits and the right settlement thereof 
and may do all such things as he thinks fit for the purpose of inducing the parties to come to a fair and 
amic able settlement of the dispute.  
(3) If a settlement of the dispute or of any of the matters in dispute is arrived at in the course of the 
conciliation proceedings the conciliation officer shall send a report thereof to the appropriate Government 
2[or an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government] togethe r with a memorandum of 

(a) “appropriate Government ” means — 
(i) in relation to any  industrial dispute concerning 4*** any industry carried on by or under 
the author ity of the Central Government, 5*** or by a railway company 6[or concerning any such 
controlled industry as may be specified in this beh alf by the Central Government] 7*** or in 
relation to an industri al dispute concerning 8[9[10[11[a Dock Labour Board established under 
section 5A of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 194 8), or 12[the 

(ii) he has been on leave with full wages , earned in the previous years;  
(iii) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by  accident arising out of and in 
the course of his employment; and  
(iv) in the case of a female, she has been on maternity leave; so, however, that the total period 
of such maternity leave does not exceed twelve wee ks.] 
1[25C. Right of work men laid -off for compensation .—Whenever a workman (other than a badli  

(d) where a party referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) is composed of workmen, all persons who 
were employed in the establishment or part of the establishment, as the case may be, to which the 
dispute relates on  the date of the dispute and all persons who subsequently become employed  in that 
establishment or part.  
19. Period of operat ion of settlements and awards .—(1) A settlement 8*** shall come into 
operation on such date as is agreed upon by the parties to the  dispute, and if no date is agreed upon, on the 

CHAPTER V  
STRIKES AND LOCK -OUTS  
22. Prohibition of strikes and lock -outs. 
23. General prohibition of strikes and lock-outs. 
24. Illegal strikes and lock -outs. 
25. Prohibition of financial aid to illegal strikes and lock -outs. 

parties to the arbitration agreement but are concerned in the dispute, shall be given an opportunity of 
presenting their case before the arbitrator or arbitrators.]  
(4) The arbitrator or arbitrators shall investigate the dispute and subm it to the appropriate 
Government the arbitration award signed by the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may be.  
2[(4A) Where an industrial dispute has been referred to arbitration and a notification has been issued 
under sub -section ( 3A), the appropriate Government may, by order, prohibit the continuance of any strike 

1987, whichever is later, apply, in the prescribed manner, to the Labour Court for adjudication of the 
dispute and the Labour Court dispose of such application in the same manner as a dispute referred 
under sub -section ( 1). 
Note .—An application under sub -section ( 4A), may be made even in respect of a dispute pending 
consideration of the Government for reference, on the date of commencement of the Industrial 
Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987.”  

conciliation officer and the appropr iate Government shall, within 3[one month] from the date of the 
receipt of such copy, publish th e same in the Official Gazette.  
2[(3A) Where an industrial dispute has been referred to arbitration and the appropriate Government is 
satisfied that the persons ma king the reference represent the majority of each party, the appropriate 
Government may, within the time referred to in sub -section ( 3), issue a notification in such manner as 
                                                           

Amendment of section 9E, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In section 9E of the principal Act, the existing 
section shall be numbered as sub section (1) and after sub -section (1) so re -numbered,   the following new 
sub-section shall be  inserted, namely: -  
"(2) Once a union has been registered as a representative union under this Act, the registration of the 
union shall be held valid for a period of two years from the date of its registration and shall continue to 
hold valid unless the registration is cancelled under section 9F o f this Act or another union is registered in 

(2) A conciliation officer may be appointed for a specified area or for specified industries in a specified area or 
for one or more specified industries and either permanently or for a limited period.  
5. Board of Conciliation .—(1) The appropriate Government may as occasion arises by notification in the 
Official Gazette constitute a Board of Conciliation for promoting the settlement of an industr ial disp ute. 
(2) A Board shall consist of a chairman and two or four other members, as the app ropriate Government thinks 
fit. 

shall not be deemed to have been laid -off for th e second half of the shift for the day and shall be 
entitled to full basic wages and dearness allowance for that part of the day ;] 
(l) “lock-out” means the  6[temporary closing of a place of employment] , or the suspension of 
work, or the refusal by an employer to continue to employ any number of persons employed by him;  
7[(la) “major port ” means a major port as defined in clause ( 8) of section 3 of the India n Ports 
Act, 1908 (15 of 1908);  

of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such 
contract being terminated under a stipulation in tha t behalf contained therein; or]  
(c) termination of the service of a workman on the g round of co ntinued ill -health;]  
4[(p) “settlement ” means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and 
includes a written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the 
course of conciliation proceeding where such a greement has been signed by the parties thereto in such 

manner of the nature of the cha nge proposed to be effected; or  
(b) within twenty -one d ays of giving such notice:  
Provided that no notice shall be required for effecting any suc h change — 
(a) where the change is effected in pursuance of any 2[settlement or award]; or  
(b) where the workmen likely to be affected by the change are persons to who m the Fundamental 
and Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, Civil Services 

the proceeding in relation to such matte r before the National Tribunal.  
6[Explanation .—In this sub -section, “Labour Court ” or “Tribunal ” includes any Court or Tribunal  
or other authority constituted under any law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial 
disputes in force in any State.]  
(7) Where any industrial dispute, in relation to which the Central Government is not the appropriate 
Government, is referr ed to a National Tribunal, then notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any 

5[15. Duties of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tri bunals .—Where an industrial dispute 
has been referred to a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for adjudication, it shall hold its 
proceed ings expeditiously and shall, 6[within the period speci fied in the order referring such industrial 
dispute or the further period extended under the second proviso to sub -section ( 2A) of section 10], submit 
its award to the appropriate Government.  
16. Form of report or award .—(1) The report of a Board or Court  shall be in writing and shall be 

"CHAPTER II -B 
Registration of Unions.  
9C. Maintenance of register .-It shall be the duty of the Registrar to maintain in such form a s may be 
prescribed a register of Unions registered by him under the provisions of this Act.  
9D. Application for Registration .-Any Union which has for the whole of the period of three months 
next preceding the date of its so applying under this section a m embership of not less than fifteen per cent. 

following new section shall be inserted, namely - 
"3A. Registrar and Assistant Registrar .-(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint a person to be the Registrar of Unions for the purpose of this Act for the 
whole of the State.  
(2) The State Government may, by similar notification, appoint a pers on to be the Assistant 
Registrar of Unions for any local area and may, by general or special order, confer on such person all 

(2) Where any declaration has been  made in relation to an award under the proviso to sub -section ( 1), 
the appropriate Government or the Central Government may, within ninety days from the date of 
publication of the award under section 17, make an order rejecting or modifying the award, and  shall, on 
the first available opportunity, lay the award together with a copy of the order before the Legislature of 
the State, if the order has been made by a State Government, or before Parliament, if the order has been 
made by the Central Government.  

retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute if such dispute is not raised in 
conciliation proceeding within a period of three years from the date of such discharg e, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination:  
Provided that an authority, as may be specified by the State Government, may consider to extend 
the said period of three years when the applicant workman satisfies the authority that he had sufficient 
cause for no t raising the dispute within the period of three years.”.  

Amendment of section 7A .—In sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 
14 of 1947) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause ( a), the following cla use shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“(aa) he is, or has been a District Judge, or ” 
[Vide Karnataka Act 6 of 1963, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 7A .—In clause ( aa) of sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial 

25B. Definition of continuous service . 
25C. Right of workmen laid -off for  compensation . 
25D. Duty of an employer to maintain muster rolls of workmen . 
25E. Workmen not entitled to compensation in certain cases . 
25F. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen . 
25FF. Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings . 

thereof, together with a full statement of such facts and circumstances, and the reasons on account of 
whic h, in his opinion, a settlement could not be arrived at.  
(5) If, on a consideration of  the report referred to in sub -section ( 4), the appropriate Government is 
satisfied that there is a c ase for reference to a Board, 3[Labour Court , Tribunal or National Tr ibunal ], it 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  

(i) it is commenced or declared in contravention of section 22 or section 23; or  
(ii) it is continued in contravention of an order made under sub -section ( 3) of section 10 1[or  
sub-section ( 4A) of section 10A].  
(2) Where a strike or lock -out in pursuance of an industrial dispute has already commenced and is in 
existence at the time of the referen ce of the dispute to a Board, 4[an arbitrator, a] 2[Labour Court, Tribunal 
or National Tribunal], the continuance of such strike or lock -out shall not be deemed to be illegal, 

an arbitrator], as the case may be, that such information shall be treated as confidential; nor shall such 
conciliation officer or any in dividual member of the Board, 9[or Court or the presiding officer of the 
Labour Court, T ribunal or National Tribunal or the arbitrator] or any person present at or concerned in the 
proceedings disclose any such information without the consent in writing of the secretary of the trade 
union or the person, firm or company in question, as the cas e may be:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a disclosure of any such information for 

  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE, POWERS AND DUTIES OF AUTHORITIES  
SECTIONS  
11. Procedure and powers of conciliation officers, Boards, Courts and Tribunals . 
11A. Powers of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in case of 

respect of such matters.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Manipur  
In section 3 of the Disturbed Areas (Special Courts) Act, 1976, (hereinafter referred to as the 
Principal Act): -- 

in any industrial  establishment have been laid -off, it shall be the duty of every employer to maintain for 
the purposes of this Chapter a muster roll and to provide for the making of entries therein by workmen 
who may present themselves for work at the establishment at the  appointed ti me during normal working 
hours.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 5, for section 25C ( w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  38 

(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects;  
(c) issuing commissions fo r the examination of witnesses;  
(d) in respect of such othe r matters as may be prescribed;  
and every inquiry or i nvestigation by a Board, Court, 4[Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal], 
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).  

2[(c) refer the dispute or any matter appearing  to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, if it 
relates to any matter specified in the Second Schedule, to a Labour Court for adjudication ; or 
(d) refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, whethe r 
it relates to any matter specified in the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, to a Tribunal for 
adjudication:  
Provided that where the dispute relates to any matter specified in the Third Schedule and is not likely to 

7. Ins. by Act 65 of 1951, s. 32.  
8. Omitted by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “a Government in British India”.  
10. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
11. Clause ( h) omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
12. Ins. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 2.  8 

chairman or any other member of a Board or Court, then, in the case of a National Tribunal, the Central 
Government and in any other case, the appropriate Government, shall appoint another person in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy, and the proceeding may be continued 
before the Labour Court, Tribunal, National Tribunal, Board or Court, as the case may be, from the stage 
at which the vacancy is filled.  
9. Finality of or ders constituting Boards, etc .—(1) No order of the appropriate Government or of 

                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962 , s. 3 and the schedule (w.e.f. 19 -12-1962) ; to 
Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963); and Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and 
the Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 2, for the sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 29 -8-1956).  
3. Omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  

National Tribunal] shall be deemed to have  commenced on the date or the 6[reference of the dispute for 
arbitration or adjudication, as the case may be] and such proceedings shall be de emed to have concluded 
7[on the date on which the award becomes enforceable under section 17A].  
21. Certain ma tters to be kept confidential .—There shall not be included in any report or award 
under this Act any information obtained by a conciliation offi cer, Board, Court, 8[Labour  Court, Tribunal, 
National Tribunal or an arbitrator] in the course of any investigation or inquiry as to a trade union or as to 

National Tribunal or an arbitrator] in the course of any investigation or inquiry as to a trade union or as to 
any individual business (whether carried on by a person, firm or company) which is not available 
otherwise than through the evi dence given befor e such officer, Board, Court, 6[Labour Court,  Tribunal, 
National Tribunal or an arbitrator], if the trade union, person, firm or company, in question has made a 
request in writing to the conciliation officer, Boar d, Court, 6[Labour Court, Tribunal, National Tribunal or 
an arbitrator], as the case may be, that such information shall be treated as confidential; nor shall such 

7B. National Tribunals . 
7C. Disqualifications for the presiding officers of Labour  Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals . 
7D. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer.  
8. Filling of vacancies . 
9. Finality of orders constituting Boards, etc . 
 

hundred rupees per mensem  or exercises,  either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or 
by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly or a managerial nature.”  
[Vide Meghalaya Act 5 of 2009, s. 2]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 2, Central Act No. 14 of   1947. - In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(Central Act No. 14 of 1947), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the 

fit. 
(3) The chairman shall be an independent person and the other members shall be persons appointed in equal 
numbers to represent the  parties to the dispute and any person appointed to represent a party shall be appointed on 
the recommendation of that party:  
Provided that, if any party fails to make a recommendation as aforesaid within the prescribed time, the 
appropriate Government sha ll appoint such persons as it thin ks fit to represent that party.  

Principal Act): -- 
 (a) in sub -section (1), between the words, “communities”, and “it may”, the following words, 
brackets and figures shall be inserted, namely — 
“or by reason of extension and indiscriminate armed violence by members of an association 
declared as unlawful association under the Unla wful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967”;  
(b)  in sub -section (2) — 

cent. of the total of the basic wages and dear ness allowance that would have been payable to h im had he 
not been so laid -off: 
Provided that if during any period of twelve months, a workman is so laid -off for more than forty -five 
days, no such compensation shall be payable in respect of any period of t he lay -off after the expiry of the 
first forty -five days, if there is an agreement to that effect between the workman and the employer:  
Provided further that it shall be lawful for the employer in any case falling within the foregoing 

[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 2A, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - In section 2A of the principal Act, after 
the existing sub -section (3), the following new sub -section shall be added, namely: - 
“(4) Notwithstanding anything in sub -sections (1), (2) and (3), no such dispute or difference 
between that workman and his emplo yer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute if such dispute is not raised in 

1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 5, for section 25C ( w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  38 
 25E. Workmen not entitled to compensation in certain cases .—No compensation shall be paid to a 
workman who has been laid -off— 
(i) if he refuses to accept any alternative employment in the same establishment from  which he 
has been laid -off, or in any other establishment belonging to the same employer situate in the same 
town or village or situate within a radius of five miles from the establishment to which he belongs, if, 

or National Tribunal], the continuance of such strike or lock -out shall not be deemed to be illegal, 
provided that such strike or lock -out was not at its commencement in contravention of the provisions of 
this Act or the continuance thereof was not prohibited under sub -section ( 3) of section 10 4[or su b-section 
(4A) of section 10A].  
(3) A lock -out declared in consequence of an illegal strike or a strike declared in consequence of an 
illegal lock -out shall not be deem ed to be illegal.  

[Vide Kerala Act 12 of 2017, s. 2]  
Assam  
Amendment of section 2 .—In the principal Act, in section 2, in clause (s) , in between the words 
“or supervisory work” and “for hire or reward”, the words ‘or any work for the promotion of sales”, 
shall be inserted.  
[Vide Assam Act 22 of 200 7, s. 2]  

Amendment) Act, 1953 (Mysore Act 15 of 1953), shall be omitted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 1 of 1960, s. 2]  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 10 .—In the industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 1947) 
(hereinafter  referred to as the principal Act), in section 10, after sub -section (4), the following sub -section 
shall be inserted  namely: — 

Government may think fit and where a Court consists of two or more members, one of them shal l be appointed as 
the chairman.  
(3) A Court, having the prescribed quorum, may act notwithstanding the absence of the c hairman or any of its 
member s or any vacancy in its number:  
Provided that, if the appropriate Government notifies the Court that the services of the chairman have ceased to 
be available, the Court shall not act until a new chairman has b een appointed.  

                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 3, for “If any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, the appropriate Government may”.  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  

appropriate Government or when the report of the Board is published under section 17, as the case 
may be; or  
(c) when a reference is made to a Court, 4[Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] under 
section 10 during the penden cy of conciliation proceedings.  
(3) Proceedings 5[before an arbitrator under section 10A or before a Labour Court, Tribunal or 
National Tribunal] shall be deemed to have  commenced on the date or the 6[reference of the dispute for 

(a) voluntary retirement of the wor kman; or  
(b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of 
employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a  stipulation in that 
behalf; or  
3[(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non -renewal of the contract 
of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such 

THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. —UNFAIR  LABOUR  PRACTICES . 
 
 
 
 
 

service for not less than one year in that undertaking immediately before such transfer shall be entitled to 
notice and compensation in accordance with the provisions of s ection 25F, as if t he workman had been 
retrenched:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a workman in any case where there has been a 

"(rrr) "Union" means a Trade Union of employees registered under the Indian 
Trade Unions Act, 1926 (Central Act XVI of 1926);"; and  
(vii) in clause (s), after the words "employed in any industry", the words "by an employer 
or by a contractor in relat ion to the execution of his contract with such employer" shall be 
inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 3]  

philanthropic service; or  
(5) khadi or village industr ies; or  
(6) any activity of the Government relatable to the sovereign functions of the Government including all the activities 
carried on by the departments of the Central Government dealing with defence research, atomic energy and space; or  
(7) any domest ic service; or  
(8) any activity, being a profession practised by an individual or body of individuals, if the number of persons 

only intermittently.  
(2) If a question arises whether an industrial establishment is of a seasonal character or whether work 
is performed therein only intermittently, the decision of the appropriate Gov ernment there on shall be 
final.  
5[Explanation .—In this section and in sections 25C, 25D and 25E, “industrial establishment ” 
means — 

preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under 
the employer for not less than — 
(i) one hundre d and ninety days in the case of a workman emplo yed below ground in a 
mine; and  
(ii) two hundred and  forty days, in any other case;  
(b) for a period of six months, if the workman, during a period of six calendar months 

persons who are or have been so employed to continue t o work or to accept employment;  
6[(qq) “trade union ” means a trade union registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926  
(16 of 1926);]  
7[(r) “Tribunal ” means an Industrial Tribunal constituted under section 7A and includes an 
Industrial Tribunal constituted before the 10th day of March, 1957, unde r this  Act;]  
8[(ra) “unfair labour practice ” means any of the practices s pecified in the Fifth Schedule;  

(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or o ther employee of a prison; or  
(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial  or administrative capacity; or  
(iv) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding 3[ten thousand 
rupees ] per mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by 
reason of the powers vested in him, functions  mainly of a managerial nature. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  

that the provisions of the said section shall not apply or shall apply, subject to su ch conditions as may be 
specified in the notification, to that class of industrial establishments or to that class of workmen 
employed in  any industrial establishment.]  
3[CHAPTER IIB  
GRIEVANCE  REDRESSAL  MACHINERY  
9C. Setting up of Grievance Redressal Machinery. —(1) Every industrial establishment 

2. The words “the Industrial Development Bank of India” omitted by Act 53 of 2003, s. 12 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 2 -7-2004).  
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 1989, s. 53 and the Second Schedule (date to be notified).  
4. Subs. by Act 5 of 1970, s. 20, for “and any subsidiary bank” (w.e.f. 19 -7-1969).  
5. Subs. by Act 40 of 1980, s. 20 (w.e.f. 15 -4-1980).  
6. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
7. Ins. by Act 65 of 1951, s. 32.  

reference to the State Gover nment.]  
7[(8) No proceedings before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal in relation to an industrial 
dispute shall lapse merely by reason of the death of any of the parties to the dispute being a workman, and 
such Labour Court, Tribunal or Nation al Tribunal shall complete such proceedings and submit its award 
to the appropriate Government.]  
  

Explanation .—”Badli  workman ” means a workman who is employed in an industrial establishment in 
the place of another workman whose name is borne on the muster rolls of the establishment,  but shall 
cease to be regarded as such for the purposes of this section, if he has completed one year of continuous  
service in the establishment.]  
25D. Duty of an employer to maintain muster rolls of wo rkmen .—Notwithstanding that workmen 
in any industrial  establishment have been laid -off, it shall be the duty of every employer to maintain for 

referred to in sub -section ( 1) or gives to any persons employed by him any such notices as are referred to 
in sub -section ( 2), he shall within five days thereof report to the appropriate Government or to such 
authority as that  Government may prescribe the number of such notices  received or given on that day.  
23. General prohibi tion of strikes and lock -outs.—No workman who is employed in any industrial 
establishment shall go on strike in breach of contract and no employer of any  such wor kman shall declare 
a lock -out— 

(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenc hment, compensation which shall be 
equivalent to fifte en days' average pay 2[for every completed year of continuous service] or any part 
there of in excess of six months; and  
(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government 3[or such authority 
as may be specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Offic ial Gazette].  
STATE AMENDMENT  

are to be paid, and to give al l necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid and such costs may, on 
application made to the appropriate Government by the person entited, be recovered by that Government 
in the same manner  as an arrear of land revenue.]  
3[(8) Every 4[Labour Court, Tri bunal or National Tribunal] shall be deemed to be Ci vil Court for the 
purposes of 5[sections 345, 346 and 348 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974 )].]  
6[(9) Every award made, order issued or settlement arrived at by or before Labour  Court or Tribunal 

service, the appropriate Government does not make a reference  to a 3[Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal] under section 10, it shall record and communicate to the parties concerned its reasons t herefor.  
(5) The Board shall submit its report under this section w ithin two months of the date 4[on which the 
dispute was referred to it] or within such shorter period as may be fixed  by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that the appropriate Government  may from time to time extend the time for the submission 
of the report by such further periods not exceeding two months in the aggregat e: 

(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to operate on the expiry of a period of six months 
from the date of order or on the date of the award of the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may be, 
whichever is earlier.  
(3) Any money paid by an employer to any person in pursuance of any order under sub -section ( 1) 
may be deducted by that employer from out of any monetary b enefit to which such person becomes 
entitled under the provisions of any award passed by the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 

continue the submission for such fu rther period as may be agreed upon between them.  
10D. Proceedings in arbitration .-The proceedings in arbitration under this Chapter shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (Central Act X of 1940) in so far as they are 
applic able and the powers which are exercisable by a Civil Court under the said provisions shall be 
exercisable by the Industrial Tribunal.  
10E. Special case may be stated to Industrial Tribunal .- The arbitrator may refer any question of 

extend to five hundred rupees or with both.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 5 of 1988, s. 4]  
1[11A. Powers of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in 
case of disc harge or dismissa l of workmen .—Where an industrial dispute relating to the discharge or 
dismissal of a workman has been referred to a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for 
adjudication and, in the course of the adjudication proceedings, the Labour Court, Tribunal  or National 

13. Duties of Board .—(1) Where a dispute has been referred to a Board under this Act, it shall be the 
duty of the Board to endeavour  to bring about a settlement of the same and for this purpose the Board 
shall, in such manner as it thinks fit and without delay, investigate the dispute and all matters affecting the 
merits and the right settlement thereof and may do all such things as it  thinks fit for the purpose of 
inducing the parties to come to a fair and amic able settlement of the dispute.  
(2) If a settlement of the dispute or of any of the matters in dispute is arrived at in the course of the 

Tribunals. —No person shall be appointed to, or continue in, the office of the presiding officer of a 
Labour Court, Trib unal or National Tribunal, if — 
(a) he i s not an independent person; or  
(b) he has attaine d the age of sixty -five years.]  
2[7D. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, 

4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 9, for “may call for” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
6. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9 (w.e.f. 17 -9-1956).  29 
 Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 1[in respect of enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him or 
of compellin g the production of documents] ]. 
2[(5) A Court, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal may, if it so thinks fit, appoint one or 

provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they 
apply in relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government.  
(3) The application referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be made to the Labour Court or Tribunal before 
the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified in sub -section ( 1).] 
STATE AMENDMENT  

the existing clause (s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes act, 1947 (Central Act No. 14 of 1947) the 
following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“(S) “Workmen” means any person (including an apprentice) employed  in any industry to do any 
manual skilled or  unskilled, technical, sales promotion, operational, clerical or supervisory work or 
any work for the promotion of sales for hire or r eward, whether the terms of employment be 
expressed or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding under this act in relation to an industrial 

town or village or situate within a radius of five miles from the establishment to which he belongs, if, 
in the opinion of the employer, such alte rnative employment does not call for any special skill or 
previous experience and can be done by the workman, provided that the wages which would normally 
have been paid to the workman are offered for t he alternative employment also;  
(ii) if he does not pr esent himself for work at the establishment at the appointed time during 
normal wor king hours at least once a day;  

2. The words “subject to the provision for appeal omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 10 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956,  s. 15, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f.  10-3-1957).  
5. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “before a Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “reference of a dispute for adjudication” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
7. Subs. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 4, for certain words.  

case may be, shall forward copies of the award made by him or it to the parties, the Commissioner of 
Labour, the Registrar and the State Government.  
(2) On receipt of such award,  the Registrar shall enter it in the register kept for the purpose.  
10J. Completion of proceeding .- The arbitration proceeding shall be deemed to have completed 
when the award is published under section 17."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 6]  

(6) A report under this section shall be submitted within fourteen days of t he commencement of the 
conciliation proceedings or within such shorter period as may be fixed by the appropriate Government:  
1[Provided that, 2[subject to the approval of the conciliation officer,] the time for the submission of 
the report may be extended by such period as may be agreed upon in writing by all the parties to the 
dispute.]  
13. Duties of Board .—(1) Where a dispute has been referred to a Board under this Act, it shall be the 

(ii) in clause (b), for the words, figures and letter "under section 10A", the words, 
figures and letter "under Chapter III -A" shall be substitut ed; 
(iii) after clause (eee) the following new clause shall be inserted, namely - 
"(eeee) "member" means a person who is an ordinary member of a Union 
and who has paid a subscription of not less than four annas per month:  
Provided that no person shall at an y time be deemed to be a member if his 

Labour Court or Tribunal, the proceeding before the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may  
be, in so far as it relates to such matter, shall be deemed to have been q uashed on such referenc e to 
the National Tribunal; and  
(b) it shall not be lawful for the appropriate Government to refer the matter under adjudication 
before the National Tribunal to any Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication during the pendency of 
the proceeding in relation to such matte r before the National Tribunal.  

Provided that where the dispute relates to any matter specified in the Third Schedule and is not likely to 
affect more than one hundred workmen, the appropriate Government may, if it so thinks fit, make the reference 
to a Labour Court under clause ( c):] 
3[Provided further that] where the dispute relates to a public utility service and a notice under section 22 
has been given, the appropriate Government shall, unless it considers that the notice has been frivolously or 
vexatiously given or that it would be i nexpedient so to do, make a reference under this  

respect of his employment or of work done in such employme nt, and i ncludes — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 for “Schedule” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -8-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3, for clause ( p) (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  

1958) in respect of that area or earlier than two years before the date of publication of the 
notification under sub -section (1), sh all be specified therein; and “.  
[Vide Manipur Act 11 of 1982, s. 2]  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new section 3A, in Central Act XIV of 1947. -After section 3 of the principal Act, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely - 

sub-section ( 1) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication of the 
dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty -five days from the date he has made the application to 
the Conciliation Officer of the appro priate Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of 
such application the Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in ac cordance with the 
provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they 

                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 11 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  33 
 (2) 1[Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), an arbitration award] which has become enforceable 
shall be binding on the parties to the agreement who referred the dispute to arbitration.]  
2[(3)] A settlement arrived at in the course of conciliati on proceedings under this Act 3[or an 

proceedings being completed.]  
(3) Where an industrial dispute has been referred to a Board, 1[Labour Court, Tribunal o r National 
Tribunal] under this section, the appropriate Government may by order prohibit the continuance of any 
strike or lock -out in connection with such dispute which may be in existence on the date of the reference.  
1[(4) Where in an order referring an industrial dispute to 2[a Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal] under this section or in a subsequent order, the appropriate Government has specified the points  

9B. Power of Government to exempt .—Where the appropriate Government is of  opinion that the 
application of the provisions of section 9A to any class of industrial establishments or to any class of 
workmen employed in any industrial establishment affect the employers in relation thereto so 
prejudicially that such application may cause serious repercussion on the industry concerned and that 
public interest so requires, the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that the provisions of the said section shall not apply or shall apply, subject to su ch conditions as may be 

Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated           
(23-10-2020). ] 
4[25FF. Compensation to workmen in cas e of transfer of undertakings .—Where the ownership or 
management of an undertaking is transferred, whether by agreement or by operation of law, from the 
employer in rela tion to that undertaking to a new employer, every workman who has been in continuous 
service for not less than one year in that undertaking immediately before such transfer shall be entitled to 

necessary or expedient so to do for securing the public safety or convenience or the maintenance of 
public order or supplies and services essential to the life of the community or for maintaining 
employment or industri al peace in the establishment concerning which such reference has been made, 
it may, by general or  special order, make provision — 
(a) for requiring the employers or workmen or both to observe such terms and conditions of 
employment as may be specified in t he order or as may be determined in accordance with the order, 

it is the appropriate Government in relation to that dispute, at any time, by order in wri ting, refer the dispute or any 
matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, whether it relates to any matter specified in the 
Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, to a National  Tribunal for adjudication.]  
(2) Where the parties to a n industrial dispute apply in the prescribed manner, whether jointly or separately, for a 
reference of the dispute to a Board, Court , 6[Labo ur Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal], the appropriate 
Government, if satisfied that the persons applying represe nt the majority of each party, shall make the 

4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3, for clause ( p) (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  
5. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
6. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
7. Subs. by Act 18 of 1957, s. 2, for clause ( r) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
8. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
9. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  11 

                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1996,  s. 2,  for “the International Airports Authority of India constituted under section 3 of the International 
Airports Authority of India Act, 1971 (48 of 1971)” (w.e.f. 11 -10-1995).  
2. Ins. by Act 53 of 1987, s. 56 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 9 -7-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 54 of 1949, s. 3, for “a mine oil -field”.  
4. Subs. by Act 24 of 1996, s. 2, for “a banking or an insurance company” (w.e.f. 11 -10-1996).  

CHAPTER IIB  
REFERENCE OF CERTAIN  INDIVIDUAL  DISPUTES TO GRIEVANCE  SETTLEMENT  AUTHORITIES  
9C. Setting up of Grievance Settlement Authorities and reference of certain individual disputes to 
such authorities . 
 
CHAPTER III  

anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, 
resignation and removal and other terms and conditions of s ervice of the Presiding Officer of the 
Industrial Tribunal appointed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 7A, shall, after 
the commencement of 3[the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of 
the said Act]: 
Provided that the Presiding Officer appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter 

                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 158 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 4 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. The word “or” omitted by Act 46 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  

21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(7) Subject to any rules made under this Act, the costs of, and incidental to, any proceeding before a 
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be in the d iscretion of that Labour Cour t, Tribunal or 
National Tribunal and the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be, shall have full 
power to determine by and to whom and to what extent and subject to what conditions, if any, such costs 
are to be paid, and to give al l necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid and such costs may, on 

(Central Act No. 14 of 1947), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act, in section 2, - 
(a) the existing sub -clause (iii) of clause (g) shall be deleted; and  
(b) in clause (s), the existing expression “by an employer or by a contractor in relation to the 
execution of his contract with such employer” shall be deleted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 2]  

                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 6 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Subs. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 6, for Chapter IIB (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982 , s. 7 (w.e.f. 21-8-1984).  21 
 (6) The Grievance Redressal Committee may complete its proceedings within thirty days on receipt 
of a written application by or on behalf of the aggrieved party.  

require:  
Provided that in any proceeding under this section the Labour Cour t, Tribunal or National Tribunal, 
as the case may be, shall rely only on the materials on record and shall not take any fresh evide nce in 
relation to the matter.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
 

or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( s) (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 2, for “one thousand six hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
4. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  

(4A) Whoever refuses or fails to attend or take part in a conciliation proceedings or fails or refuses to 
produce the documents in pursuance of an order issued under sub -section ( 4), shall, on conviction, be 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for sub -sections ( 5) to ( 7) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule.  

Karnataka  
Amendment of Central Act XIV of 1947 .—(1) In section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as 
amended by the Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949 (Madras Act XII of 1949),                    
sub-section (2A) shall be omitted.  
(2) Section 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, a s inserted by the Industrial Disputes (Mysore 
Amendment) Act, 1953 (Mysore Act 15 of 1953), shall be omitted.  

Provided further that the registration of a Union shall not be cancelled under the 
provisions of this sub -clause unless its membership at the time of the cancellation is less 
than such minimum; or  
(iii) that the registered Union is being conducted not bona fide in the interests of 
workmen but in the interests of employers to the prejudice of the interests of workmen; or  
(iv) that it has instigated, aided or assisted the commencement or continuance of 

Kerala  
Amendment of Section 7A .—In sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(Central Act 14 of 1947) for clause ( a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“(a) he is, or has been, a judicial officer not below the rank of a District Judge, or is qualified for 
appointment as a Judge of a High Court; or” . 
                                                           

but does not include an auditor;]  
(m) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(n) “public utility service ” means — 
(i) any railway service 7[or any transport service for the carriage of passe ngers or goods by 
air]; 
 8[(ia) any service in, or in connection with the worki ng of, any major port 9[or dock  or any 

9. Clause ( aa) re-lettered as clause ( aaa) by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
10. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
11. Subs. by Act 38 of 1959, s. 64 and the third Schedule, Part II, for clause ( bb). 
12. Ins. by Act 28 of 1981, s. 40 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 4 -1-1982).  
13. Ins. by Act 62 of 1984, s. 71 and the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 20 -3-1985). 7 
 1[2***,] 3[the Small Industries Development Bank of India established under section 3 of the Small  

adjudication and, in the course of the adjudication proceedings, the Labour Court, Tribunal  or National 
Tribunal, as the case may be, is satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified, it may, 
by its award, set aside the order of discharge or dismissal and direct reinstatement of the workman on 
such terms and conditions, if  any, as it thinks fit, or give such other relief to the workman including the 
award of any lesser punishment in lieu of discharge or dismissal as the circums tances of the case may 
require:  

(i) a person shall be deemed to be “independent ” for the p urpose of his appointment as the 
chairman or other member of a Board, Court or Tribunal, if he is unconnected with the industrial 
dispute referred to such Board, Court or Tribunal or with any industry dir ectly affected by such 
dispute:  
12[Provided that no p erson shall cease to be independent by reason only of the fact that he is a 
shareholder of an incorporated company which is connected with, or likely to be affected by, such 

38. Power to make rules . 4 
 SECTIONS  
39. Delegation of powers . 
40. Power to amend Schedules . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. —INDUSTRIES WHICH MAY BE DECLARED TO BE PUBLIC UTILITY 
SERVICES UNDER SUB -CLAUSE ( vi) OF CLAUSE ( n) OF SECTION 2 . 

Tribunal or of a National Tribunal] for decision whether the period of operation should not, by rea son of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 9, for “An arbitration award” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
2. Section 18 re -numbered as sub -section ( 3) of that section by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  
3. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 9 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. Subs. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule, for “an award which is declared by the appropriate Government to be binding 

[Vide Assam Act 22 of 200 7, s. 2]  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 2. —In clause(s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 (14 of 
1947), for the words and comma “operational, clerical or supervisory work”, the words and commas 
“sales promotion, operational, clerical or supervisory work or any work for promotion of sales” shall be 
substituted.  

STATE AMENDMENT  
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Section 25F .—In clause (b), for "fifteen days", substitute "thirty days"  
[Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second 
Order, 2020,  Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated           

years from the date of regis tration of the representative union" shall be inserted; and  
(b) in sub -section (3), for the words "three months immediately preceding the date of the 
application", the words "at least   three months during the period of six months immediately preceding 
the calendar month in which it so applied" shall be substituted . 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 5]  
Amendment of section 9C, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - Section 9C of the principal Act, as inserted by 

Government, is referr ed to a National Tribunal, then notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any 
reference in section 15, section 17, section 19, section 33A, section 33B and section 36A to the 
appropriate Government in relation to such dispute shall be construed as a reference to the Central 
Government but, save as aforesaid and as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, any reference in any 
other provision of this Act to the appropriate Government in relation to that dispute shall mean a 
reference to the State Gover nment.]  

 
Tamil Nadu   
Insertion of new section 11 -B-After section 11 -A of the Industrial Disputes act, 1947 (Central Act XIV 
of 1947), the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
“11-B. Power of Labour Court or Tribunal to execute its award by decree - A Labour Court 
or a Tribunal shall have the power of a civil court to execut e its o wn award as a decree of a civil court 

3. Ins. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule.  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
6. Ins. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 7 (w.e.f 15 -9-2010).  30 
 punishable with imprisonment for a period which may extend to three months or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees or with both.”  

Committee has two members and in case the number of members are more than two, the number o f women 
members may be increased proportionately.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the setting up of Grievance Redressal 
Committee shall not affect the right of the workman to raise industrial dispute on the same matter under 
the pro visions of this Act.  
                                                           

shall be inserted  namely: — 
“(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the section 9C and in this section, in the case of a 
dispute falling within the scope  of section 2A, the individual workman concerned may, within six 
months from the date of communication to him of the order of di scharge, dismissa l, retrenchment or 
termination or the date of commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act , 
1987, whichever is later, apply, in the prescribed manner, to the Labour Court for adjudication of the 

(3) The chairperson of the Grievance Redressal Committee shall be selected from the employer and 
from among the workmen alternatively on rotation basis every year.  
(4) The total number of members o f the Grievance Redressal Committee shall not exceed more than 
six: 
Provided that there shall be, as far as practicable, one woman member if the Grievance Redressal 
Committee has two members and in case the number of members are more than two, the number o f women 

under the Code of civil Procedure, 19 08 (Central Act V of 1908), in respect of the following matters, 
namely: — 
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(ii) compelling the production of documents;  
(iii) issuing commission for examination of witness.  
(4A) Whoever refuses or fails to attend or take part in a conciliation proceedings or fails or refuses to 

33A. Special provision for adjudication as to whether conditions of service, etc., changed during 
pendency of proceedings.  
33B. Power to transfer certain proceedings.  
33C. Recovery of money due from an employer.  
34. Cognizance o f offences . 
35. Protection of persons . 

(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding o fficer of a National Tribunal 
1[unless he is, or has been, a Judge  of a High Court].  
(4) The Central Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint two persons as assessors to advise the 
National Tribunal in the proceeding before it.  
7C. Disqualifications for the presiding officers of Labour Courts, Tr ibunals and National  
Tribunals. —No person shall be appointed to, or continue in, the office of the presiding officer of a 

STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala   
Amendment of section 2 .—In section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 
1947), in clause (s), for  the words “clerical or supervisory work” the words “clerical, supervisory 
work or any work for the promotion of sales” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Kerala Act 12 of 2017, s. 2]  

consultation with their trade union, if any, registered under the Indian Trade  Unions Act, 1926  
(16 of 1926).  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Works Committee to promote measures for securi ng and preserving 
amity and good relations between the employer and workmen and, to that end, to comment upon matters 
of their common interest or concern and endeavour to compose any material difference of opin ion in 
respect of such matters.  

Tribunal, as the case may be, consti tuted by the State Government. ] 
5[(1A) Where the Central Government is of opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is 
apprehended and the dispute involves any question of national importance or is of such a nature that 
industrial establishments situated in more than one State are likely to be interested in, or affected by, such dispute 
and that the dispute should be adjudicated by a National Tribunal, then, the Central Government may, whether or not 
it is the appropriate Government in relation to that dispute, at any time, by order in wri ting, refer the dispute or any 

(f) “Court ” means a Court of Inqu iry constituted under this Act;  
(g) “employer ” means ,— 
(i) in relation to an industry carried on by or under the a uthority of any department of 9[the 
Central Government or a State Government], the authority prescribed in this behalf, or where no 
authority is prescribed, the head of the departmen t; 
(ii) in relation to an industry carried on by or on behalf of a local authority, the chief 

25Q. Penalty for lay -off and re trenchment without previous permission . 
25R. Penalty for closure . 
25S. Certain provisions of Chapter VA to apply to an industrial establishment to which this Chapter 
applies . 
 
CHAPTER VC  

(o) “railway company ” means a railway company as defined in section 3 of the Indian Railways 
Act, 1890 (9  of 1890);  
2[(oo) “retrenchment ” means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any 
reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary  action, but does 
not include — 
(a) voluntary retirement of the wor kman; or  

constitute one or more National Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes which, in 
the opinion of the Central Government, involve questions of national importance or are of such a nature 
that industrial establishments situated in more than one State are likely to be interested in,  or affected  by, 
such disputes.  
(2) A National Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding o fficer of a National Tribunal 

Management established for two or more cont iguous States under section 16 of the Food 
Corporat ions Act, 1964 (37 of 1964), or 1[the Airports Authority of India constituted under 
section 3 of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 (55 of 1994)] , or a Regional Rural Bank 
established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 (21 of 1976), or the Export 
Credit and Guarantee Corporation Limited or the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India 2[the 
National Housing Bank established under sec tion 3 of the National Housing B ank Act, 1987 (53 

 on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the consti tution of, such Board or 
Court.  
(2) No settlement arrived at in the cou rse of a conciliation proceeding shall be invalid by reason only 
of the fact that such settlement was arrived at after the expiry of the period referred to in sub -section ( 6) 
of section 12 or sub -section ( 5) of section 13, as the case may be.  
(3) Where the  report of any settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding before a 

22. Prohibi tion of strikes and lock -outs.—(1) No person employed in a public utility service shall 
go on  strike in breach of contract — 
(a) without giving to the emplo yer notice of strike, as herein after provided, withi n six weeks 
before striking; or  
(b) within fourteen days of giving such notice; or  
(c) before the expiry of the date of strike specified in a ny such notice as aforesaid; or  

otherwise erroneous.  
(3) The Industrial Tribunal in appeal, may confirm, modify or rescind any order passed by the 
Registrar and may pass such co nsequential orders as it may deem fit. A copy of the orders passed by the 
Industrial Tribunal, shall be sent to the Registrar.  17 
 9J. Publication of orders .-Every order passed under section 9E or section 9F or section 9G and 
every order passed in appeal under  section 9I shall be published in the prescribed manner."  

